REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
The diagnostic and triage accuracy of digital and online
symptom checker tools: a systematic review
William Wallace 1,5, Calvin Chan 1,5, Swathikan Chidambaram 1, Lydia Hanna 1, Fahad Mujtaba Iqbal 1,2, Amish Acharya 1,2,
Pasha Normahani 1, Hutan Ashra ﬁan2, Sheraz R. Markar 1,3,4, Viknesh Sounderajah 2 ✉ and Ara Darzi 1,2
Digital and online symptom checkers are an increasingly adopted class of health technologies that enable patients to input their
symptoms and biodata to produce a set of likely diagnoses and associated triage advice. However, concerns regarding the accuracy
and safety of these symptom checkers have been raised. This systematic review evaluates the accuracy of symptom checkers in
providing diagnoses and appropriate triage advice. MEDLINE and Web of Science were searched for studies that used either real or
simulated patients to evaluate online or digital symptom checkers. The primary outcomes were the diagnostic and triage accuracy
of the symptom checkers. The QUADAS-2 tool was used to assess study quality. Of the 177 studies retrieved, 10 studies met the
inclusion criteria. Researchers evaluated the accuracy of symptom checkers using a variety of medical conditions, including
ophthalmological conditions, in ﬂammatory arthritides and HIV. A total of 50% of the studies recruited real patients, while the
remainder used simulated cases. The diagnostic accuracy of the primary diagnosis was low across included studies (range:
19–37.9%) and varied between individual symptom checkers, despite consistent symptom data input. Triage accuracy (range:
48.8–90.1%) was typically higher than diagnostic accuracy. Overall, the diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers are
variable and of low accuracy. Given the increasing push towards adopting this class of technologies across numerous health
systems, this study demonstrates that reliance upon symptom checkers could pose signi ﬁcant patient safety hazards. Large-scale
primary studies, based upon real-world data, are warranted to demonstrate the adequate performance of these technologies in a
manner that is non-inferior to current best practices. Moreover, an urgent assessment of how these systems are regulated and
implemented is required.
npj Digital Medicine           (2022) 5:118 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-022-00667-w
INTRODUCTION
Digital and online symptom checkers are application or software
tools that enable patients to input their symptoms and biodata to
produce a set of differential diagnoses and clinical triage advice.
The diagnostic function of symptom checkers is to provide a list of
differential diagnoses, ranked by likelihood 1. The triage function
highlights to end-users the most appropriate course of action
regarding their potential diagnosis, which typically includes
seeking urgent care; contacting their general practitioner; or
self-care. Symptom checkers have become an increasingly
prominent feature of the modern healthcare landscape due to
increasing access to internet connectivity and a cultural shift
towards more involved self-care engagement 2. In 2020, 96% of UK
households had internet access, of which over one-third of adults
used the internet to self-diagnose health-related issues 2,3.
Governments have also incorporated symptom checkers into
their formal health and social care pathways in order to alleviate
the increasing burden that is placed upon both primary care
services and emergency services, particularly in light of the COVID-
19 pandemic 4–6. In 2017, the NHS 111 triage service, backed by
Babylon, reported over 15,500 app downloads and was respon-
sible for over 9700 triages 7. In 2021, Babylon reportedly covered
4.3 million people worldwide, performing over 1.2 million digital
consultations with 4000 clinical consultations each day, with one
patient interaction every 10 s.
It has been previously estimated that 12% of emergency
department (ED) attendances would be more appropriately
managed at other sites of care 8,9. Hence, symptom checkers have
the potential to reduce the ﬁnancial and resource burden placed
upon hospitals and can help focus resources towards those who
are truly in medical need. Public and private companies have
advertised symptom checkers to be a cost-effective solution that
may serve as a ﬁrst port-of-call for patients and effectively
signpost patients to the most appropriate healthcare service.
When used appropriately, symptom checkers can advise patients
with serious conditions to seek urgent attention and conversely
prevent those with problems best resolved through self-care from
unnecessarily seeking medical attention 1.
However, for all of the potential health, organisational and
ﬁnancial bene ﬁts, symptom checkers are heavily dependent on
the accuracy of diagnostic and triage advice that they provide.
Overtriaging those with non-urgent ailments will exacerbate the
unnecessary use of healthcare services. Conversely and more
seriously, inaccuracies in diagnosing and triaging patients with
life-threatening conditions could result in preventable morbidity
and mortality 1,10. In fact, symptom checkers have previously
received heavy media criticism for not correctly diagnosing
cancer, cardiac conditions, and providing differing advice to
patients with the same symptomatology but different demo-
graphic characteristics 11–13. These alleged reports raise concerns
around the possibility that these systems may deliver unequitable
clinical performance across different gender and
1Department of Surgery & Cancer, Imperial College London, St. Mary ’s Hospital, London W2 1NY, UK. 2Institute of Global Health Innovation, Imperial College London, South
Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK. 3Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. 4Nufﬁeld Department of Surgery, Churchill
Hospital, University of Oxford, OX3 7LE Oxford, UK. 5These authors contributed equally: William Wallace, Calvin Chan. ✉email: vs1108@imperial.ac.uk
www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
1234567890():,;

sociodemographic groups. In a previous systematic review,
Chambers et al. (2019) assessed symptom checkers on their safety
and ability to correctly diagnose and distinguish between high
and low acuity conditions 14. The diagnostic accuracy was found to
be variable between different platforms and was generally low.
Given the rapid expansion in commercially available digital and
online symptom checkers, a more updated review is warranted to
determine if this is still the case. Thus, this review aims to
systematically evaluate the currently available literature regarding
(1) the accuracy of digital and online symptom checkers in
providing diagnoses and appropriate triage advice as well as (2)
the variation in diagnoses and triage recommendations provided
by differing symptom checkers given identical clinical input data
within the same study.
RESULTS
Search
The literature search yielded ten studies that met the inclusion
criteria. Figure 1 presents the ﬂow of studies through the
screening process. An overview of the risk of bias assessment
using QUADAS-2 can be found in Fig. 2. Most studies had domains
of ‘unclear’ or ‘high’ risk of bias or applicability concerns. Six
studies had one or more domains at a ‘high’risk of bias 15–20.
Characteristics of participants and interventions
Characteristics of included studies can be found in Table 1. Study
population size ranged from 27 to 214 patients or vignettes 16,20.
Three studies were conducted by researchers in USA 1,21,22, and
one each in Australia 18, Canada 17, Hong Kong 19, Spain 16, and the
UK15. The remaining two were multinational studies 20,23.
Three studies involved prospective data collection (i.e., from
outpatient clinics and ED waiting areas) 15,16,21, two studies
involved retrospective analysis of ED clinical assessments 19,22,
and ﬁve studies used ‘simulated’ patient vignettes (i.e., cases
written by clinicians) 1,17,18,20,23. The pathologies evaluated
included hand conditions 21,i n ﬂammatory arthritides 15, infectious
diseases (HIV and Hepatitis C) 22, ophthalmic conditions 17, and
orofacial conditions 20. Four studies examined a wide range of
general medical conditions pertinent to ED and general
practice1,18,19,23.
A total of 48 different symptom checkers were utilised in the
included studies. Three studies only used one symptom
checker16,17,21, while two studies used more than 20 symptom
checkers1,18. Of note, the WebMD symptom checker was assessed
eight times and was the most commonly assessed symptom
checker in this review 1,15,17,18,20–23.
Diagnostic accuracy
Nine studies evaluated symptom checker diagnostic accuracy
(Table 2). Overall primary diagnostic accuracy (i.e., listing the
correct diagnosis ﬁrst) was low in all studies, ranging from 19 to
38% (Fig. 3)15,16. Top three diagnostic accuracy, measured in seven
studies, ranged from 33 to 58% 16,21. Diagnostic accuracy for each
speciﬁc symptom checker can be found in Supplementary Table 1.
Triage accuracy
Six studies examined the accuracy of symptom checkers in
providing correct triage advice (Table 2). Overall triage accuracy
tended to be higher than diagnostic accuracy, ranging from 49 to
90% (Fig. 4)18,22,23. Three studies strati ﬁed ﬁndings by emergency
and non-emergency cases. Two studies reported that emergency
cases were triaged more accurately (mean percentage [95% CI])
than non-urgent cases (80% [75 –86] versus 55% [47 –63], and 63%
[52–71] versus 30% [11 –39], respectively) 1,18. However, another
study demonstrated that the accuracy of triage advice for
ophthalmic emergencies was signi ﬁcantly lower than in non-
urgent conditions (39% [14 –64] versus 88% [73 –100])17. Triage
accuracy for each speci ﬁc symptom checker can be found in
Supplementary Table 2.
Fig. 1 Preferred reporting items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) ﬂow diagram showing the process of study selection for
this systematic review of symptom checker diagnostic and triage accuracy.
W. Wallace et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2022)   118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
1234567890():,;

Variation in accuracy
All ﬁve studies that reported >1 symptom checker demonstrated
marked variability in diagnostic accuracy among different
symptom checkers for the same patient vignettes 1,18,20,22,23. For
a standardised set of general medical vignettes, mean primary
diagnostic accuracy ranged from 5 to 50% 1. Accuracy for
diagnosing primary care conditions ranged from 18 to 48% 23.
Correct diagnosis of infectious diseases ranged from 3 to 16% 22.
Finally, primary diagnostic accuracy of different symptom checkers
assessing orofacial conditions ranged from 0 to 38.5% 20. Similarly,
the accuracy of triage advice given by individual symptom
checkers varied within a study. Semigran et al. and Hill et al. found
a range of 33 to 78% and 17 to 61%, respectively, for general
medical condtions 1,18. Gilbert et al. reported a mean triage
accuracy range of 80 –97% for 200 primary care vignettes 23.
Variations in accuracy of providing diagnoses and triage advice
were also apparent for speci ﬁc symptom checkers examining
different conditions. The WebMD symptom checker was most
frequently used and was assessed in eight studies. The primary
diagnostic accuracy of WebMD ranged from 3 to 53% across a
variety of medical conditions that were assessed in eight included
studies (Table 3)1,22.
DISCUSSION
This systematic review evaluated the diagnostic and triage
accuracy of symptom checkers for a variety of medical conditions
using both simulated and real-life patient vignettes. Our review
highlighted that both diagnostic and triage accuracies were
generally low. Moreover, there is considerable variation across
symptom checkers despite being presented with uniform
symptom parameters. We also note that the diagnostic and triage
accuracies of symptom checkers, as well as the variation in
performance, were greatly dependent on the acuity of the
condition assessed. As a whole, these issues raise multiple
concerns about the use of symptom checkers as patient-facing
tools, especially given their increasingly endorsed role within
health systems as triage services that direct patients towards
appropriate treatment pathways.
It can be argued that the accuracy of triage advice given by
symptom checkers is of greater importance compared to
diagnostic accuracy, especially considering the increasing role of
symptom checkers as triage services that direct users towards
appropriate treatment. This is signi ﬁcant for acute and life-
threatening conditions, where the ability of a symptom checker to
classify between the need to seek urgent medical attention versus
non-urgent medical attention is particularly important. Moreover,
as attaining an accurate diagnosis of certain pathologies (e.g., HIV,
autoimmune conditions, malignancies) by clinicians would typi-
cally involve further biochemical or radiological investigation; it
would be arguably unrealistic to expect symptom checkers to be
accurate in their diagnosis of the full spectrum of medical
conditions. Thus, the onus on symptom checkers should be placed
on triage advice accuracy, rather than accurate diagnosis, to
ensure users are signposted towards appropriate healthcare
pathways.
However, when unsafe triage advice is paired with an incorrect
set of differential diagnoses, this alignment of errors increases the
likelihood of clinical harm to patients, not unlike the Swiss-Cheese
model that is cited in aviation safety reports 24. For example, in the
UK, Babylon, an NHS-backed symptom checker, has been alleged
to suggest that a breast lump may not necessarily represent
cancer and it has also been reported to have misinterpreted
myocardial infarctions as panic attacks 11,12. While there will be
instances where probability-based clinical decision-making tools
are incorrect, a safety- ﬁrst approach needs to be employed for
speciﬁc high-risk conditions, particularly when processing low-risk
symptoms that may mask or mimic more life-threatening
problems.
Variability in accuracy is a concerning recurrent theme in the
included studies and indicates that patients are provided with
heterogeneous advice, dependent on the symptom checker used
and the condition assessed, which results in a spectrum of issues.
There is a caveat that such variability is demonstrated through
values that are based on different vignettes, time-points, and
research teams, all of which introduce confounding factors that
require accounting for in future work. However, despite this,
variability combined with poor diagnostic and triage accuracy
presents a multidimensional system of potential patient harm.
Although ‘undertriaging’ has clearly appreciable deleterious
effects on patient wellbeing, it is worth noting that ‘overtriaging’
manifests in inappropriate health resource utilisation through
unnecessary presentation to emergency services. Even if this does
not impact the health of the primary symptom checker user, it
does confer a knock-on opportunity cost that is shouldered by
those truly in need of emergency services and are left waiting for
medical attention. Although the impact of variable triaging advice
from symptom checkers has yet to be robustly researched, the
highly varied accuracy between symptom checkers noted in this
review suggests that there is considerable scope for discrepancies
in quality and health outcomes.
Fig. 2 Risk of bias summary using QUADAS-2 risk assessment
tool44. Authors’ judgement regarding each domain of bias of each
study synthesised on the accuracy of symptom checkers. Risk was
categorised into one of three categories: low risk ( +), unclear risk (?)
and high risk ( −). The table shows possible items to consider in
future work involving symptom checkers to achieve a low risk of
bias or applicability concerns.
W. Wallace et al.
3
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022)   118 

Table 1. Characteristics of the ten studies included in the systematic review on the diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers.
First
author (year)
Study design Participants Intervention Symptom checker(s) used Comparator Outcome measures
Hageman
(2015)21
Prospective cross-
sectional study
86 hand clinic patients Outpatients prospectively
input data and symptoms into
symptom checker to guess
diagnosis
WebMD Diagnosis from a hand
surgeon
Diagnostic accuracy (top 3)
Semigran
(2015)1
Vignette cross-
sectional study
45 standardised
vignettes:
15 emergency
15 non-emergency
15 self-care
Patient data and symptoms
from various cases input into
23 symptom checkers
Ask MD, BetterMedicine. DocResponse,
Doctor Diagnose, Drugs.com, EarlyDoc,
Esagil, Family Doctor, FreeMD, HMS Family
Health Guide, Healthline, Healthwise,
Healthy Children, Isabel, iTriage, Mayo
Clinic, MEDoctor, NHS Symptom Checkers,
Steps2Care, Symcat, Symptify,
Symptomate, WebMD
True diagnosis and
appropriate
triage advice
Diagnostic accuracy
(primary diagnosis, top 3
and top 20 results)
Triage accuracy (overall,
emergency, non-emergency,
self-care)
Powley (2016) 15 Prospective cross-
sectional study
34 in ﬂammatory
arthritis patients
Patients completed NHS and
WebMD symptom checkers
with their presenting
symptoms
NHS Choices, WebMD Diagnosis from
secondary care
Diagnostic accuracy
(primary diagnosis, top 5)
Berry (2019) 22 Retrospective cross-
sectional study
ED records of 168 HIV/
hepatitis C patients
Retrospective input of patient
data into symptom checkers
Mayo Clinic, WebMD, Symptomate,
Symcat, Isabel
Emergency department
physician determined
diagnosis
Diagnostic accuracy
(primary diagnosis, top 3
and top 10)
Triage accuracy
Nazario
Arancibia
(2019)16
Prospective cross-
sectional study
214 low-priority ED
patients
Patients interviewed using
questions from symptom
checker to produce
differentials
Mediktor Emergency department
diagnosis
Diagnostic accuracy
(primary diagnosis, top 3,
top 5, and top 10)
Shen (2019) 17 Vignette cross-
sectional study
42 vignettes of
ophthalmic conditions
Cases inputted into symptom
checker to record results
WebMD True diagnosis and
appropriate
triage advice
Diagnostic accuracy
(primary diagnosis and top
3). Triage accuracy
(emergency, non-
emergency)
Gilbert (2020) 23 Vignette cross-
sectional study
200 primary care
vignettes
Vignettes used to input into
symptom checkers and to
assess general
practitioners (GPs)
ADA, Babylon, Buoy, K health, Mediktor,
Symptomate, WebMD, YourMD
True diagnosis and GPs Diagnostic accuracy
(primary diagnosis, top 3
and top 5)
Triage accuracy
Hill (2020) 18 Vignette cross-
sectional study
48 vignettes with
‘Australia-speciﬁc
conditions’
Vignettes summarised and
entered in symptom checkers
36 symptom checkers,
17 diagnostic only, 9 triage only advice. 10
that provide both.
True diagnosis and
appropriate
triage advice
Diagnostic accuracy
(primary diagnosis, top 3
and top 10)
Triage accuracy (emergency,
non-emergency, self-care)
Yu (2020)19 Retrospective cross-
sectional study
100 ED patient records Retrospectively using patient
records to input information
into symptom checkers
Drugs.com
FamilyDoctor
Given ED triage level Triage accuracy
Yoshida (2021)20 Vignette cross-
sectional study
27 vignettes of
orofacial pain
conditions
Vignettes of varied orofacial
conditions input into symptom
checkers
Esagil, FreeMD, Healthline, Isabel, Mayo
Clinic, MEDoctor, Symcat, Symptify,
Symptomate, WebMD, ADA
True diagnosis by
resident in orofacial
pain and oral medicine
Diagnostic accuracy
(primary diagnosis, top 4)
W. Wallace et al.
4
npj Digital Medicine (2022)   118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

Table 2. Overall and range of average diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers in each study.
First author (year) No. of symptom
checkers
Overall average
diagnostic accuracy (%)
Range of average
diagnostic accuracy (%)
Average triage
accuracy (%)
Range of average triage
accuracy (%)
Hageman (2015) 21 1 33 n/a ns n/a
Semigran (2015) 1 23 34 5 – 50 57 33 – 78
Powley (2016) 15 1 19 n/a ns n/a
Berry (2019) 22 5n s 3 – 16.4 48.8 ns
Nazario Arancibia
(2019)16
1 37.9 n/a ns n/a
Shen (2019) 17 1 26 n/a 66.7 n/a
Gilbert (2020) 23 8 26.1 18 – 48 90.1 80 – 97.8
Hill (2020) 18 36 36 12 – 61 49 17 – 61
Yu (2020)19 2n s n s 6 2 5 0 – 74
Yoshida (2021)20 11 21.7 0 – 38.5 ns ns
n/a not applicable as only one symptom checker was used, ns not stated.
Fig. 3 Mean primary diagnostic accuracy of symptom checkers in each study. Error bars signify the range of accuracy of different symptom
checkers for the same patient/vignette population. An overall accuracy value was not given in Berry (2019).
Fig. 4 Mean accuracy of triage information given by symptom checkers in each study. Error bars signify the range of accuracy of different
symptom checkers for the same patient/vignette population.
W. Wallace et al.
5
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022)   118 

Many cite the poor transparency and reporting of both
symptom checker development and subsequent clinical validation
as issues that severely limit the extent to which these technologies
can be meaningfully endorsed for population-wide use within
health systems. Minimal evidence is provided regarding the
context, patient demographics and clinical information that is
used to create symptom checkers. Case coverage (i.e., what
conditions and patient populations are accounted for by the
software) must be explained, especially since symptom checkers
may not account for geographical or country-speci ﬁc variations in
disease prevalence, thus impacting generalisability and potential
utility. Moreover, symptom checkers are not explainable in how
they arrive to their recommendations. A focus on explainability
would signi ﬁcantly increase the ability to effectively audit these
devices as well as increase trust from both patients and healthcare
professionals in the outputs they provide. Overall trust is also
hindered by claims of several symptom checkers to purported
house ‘AI algorithms ’as part of their diagnostic process, despite
not providing any convincing evidence for this, again re ﬂecting
the poor transparency and reporting of the symptom checker
development and validation process.
In their current guise, symptom checkers are at best considered
as an adjunctive technology which may direct patients towards
various services with an appropriate level of urgency and reduce
the burden placed on EDs and primary care services. This is
especially relevant in areas where access to traditional assessment
models may be scarce. However, our study has highlighted several
safety and regulatory concerns in their potential use, particularly
around variation between different symptom checkers and the
conditions being assessed.
Study limitations
First, ﬁve of the included studies used simulated patient vignettes,
which are unlikely to represent the complexity of real patients 25–27.
Future work could include real-life patient data to increase
software exposure to the nuances of real-life patient populations.
Second, bias is inevitable in retrospective studies, since much of
the data being inputted rely on accurate documentation of patient
details, their symptoms, and outcomes afterwards. Third, the
observed variation between symptom checkers may be partly
attributable to study heterogeneity, including the medical condi-
tions studied, their context, and the way symptom details are
inputted into the symptom checker (sequence, level of certainty
and agreement). Fourth, several studies have suggested that
diagnostic accuracy of symptom checkers may improve over time
given increased exposure to data upon which an AI-centred model
may iterate. This can lead to variance in performance that is hard to
account for in a cross-sectional study. Fifth, this review did not
capture all existing online symptom checkers. The internet is
abundant with symptom checkers and although the majority do
not have any validatory reports, newer and more improved
symptom checkers to those studied may be available. Finally, our
study synthesises data and ﬁndings from high-income countries
given the paucity of data from middle and low-economically
developed countries, which may exhibit different health-seeking
behaviours, digital literacy rates, and disease burdens.
Recommendations
For regulatory organisations . A reassessment of how symptom
checkers are regulated is required so that the class of these
devices better re ﬂect the clinical function and associated risk that
these systems serve in the real world as a public-facing source of
medical advice 10,28. Currently, global regulatory authorities, such
as The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, the
regulatory body responsible for medicines and medical devices in
the UK, perceive symptom checkers to be low-risk medical
devices29. As such, these systems are only subject to self-
certiﬁcation prior to entering the open market. As highlighted
by our results, there is a considerable clinical risk that can be
associated with the use of these systems. Despite disclaimers,
these systems clearly provide end-users with different diagnoses
and behavioural recommendations. Symptom checkers, including
testing and validation data and other premarket submissions,
should be scrutinised and approved through regulatory body
review, aided by independent experts; akin to the process that is
required for Software as Medical Devices approval from the FDA 30.
Greater regulatory scrutiny must centre around clear reporting of
diagnostic performance, the datasets used to train and validate
the systems as well as the clinical context in which evaluations
were undertaken. Viewing these systems as a higher class of
medical devices would also allow mandate greater post-market
surveillance scrutiny, which will supersede the current status quo
of anecdotal reports through media sources.
For developers of symptom checkers . Robust clinical validation
and testing is warranted to improve current software trustworthi-
ness and reliability. The responsibility of this process lies with
companies that develop such technologies; a process that is akin
to how pharmaceutical companies are expected to provide data
supporting the ef ﬁcacy and safety of drugs to regulators.
The development of symptom checkers should ideally incorpo-
rate real-world patient data. Within their product life cycle, digital
health technologies, particularly those which are AI-centred,
typically go through a training phase, a validation phase, and a
test phase. Within a training phase, a model (e.g., a symptom
checker) learns a particular task (e.g., to identify or triage
Table 3. Primary diagnostic accuracy of WebMD in included studies.
First author (year) Participants WebMD primary diagnostic accuracy (%)
Hageman (2015) 21 86 hand clinic patients 33
Semigran (2015) 1 45 standardised vignettes: 36
15 emergency
15 non-emergency
15 self-care
Powley (2016) 15 34 in ﬂammatory arthritis patients 19
Berry (2019) 22 ED records of 168 HIV/hepatitis C patients 3 (Hep C), 7.8 (HIV), 7.1 (both)
Shen (2019) 17 42 vignettes of ophthalmic conditions 26
Gilbert (2020) 23 200 primary care vignettes 21
Hill (2020) 18 48 vignettes with ‘Australia-speciﬁc conditions ’ 53
Yoshida (2021)20 27 vignettes of orofacial pain conditions 30.77
W. Wallace et al.
6
npj Digital Medicine (2022)   118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

diagnoses) using a particular dataset (e.g., real or simulated
examples of a particular clinical presentation). During the
validation phase, further data is used to provide an unbiased
evaluation of model accuracy, which allows developers to ﬁne
tune aspects of the model prior to committing to a ﬁnal version. A
test phase uses data that the model has not encountered before
(e.g., new clinical data) in order to evaluate overall performance
(e.g., diagnostic or triage accuracy). For a number of reasons,
including ﬁnancial and ease of access, some developers rely upon
simulated vignettes or synthetic data in order to provide the data
required for the aforementioned phases.
While vignettes or synthetic data with typical disease patterns
and standardised presentations may be viewed as a viable and
accessible means of training a symptom checker, this may not
negate the need for testing using real-world cases 27. Clinical
vignettes are inherently limited in their utility to assess the
diagnostic accuracy or triage safety of symptom checkers. Real-
world evidence studies involving real patients have been
recommended to examine the performance of symptom checkers
against clinicians 27. The importance of using real-world data
within digital health technology development is also strongly
supported by regulatory authorities, as evidenced by the
introduction of the ‘Real World Evidence ’ program by the FDA,
which have also approved databases with real-world patient data
to support this initiative 31–33.
Obtaining a representative and balanced patient vignette set is
especially pertinent for the training of symptom checkers and
development of AI algorithms. The lack of quality training data
and the presence of dataset imbalances will likely directly
inﬂuence the diagnostic model and will negatively impact
diagnostic and triage accuracy 34. Building upon this, developers
should use a wide and representative range of cases that
encompass typical and atypical disease presentations; various
demographic fractions (age, gender, and ethnicity) as well as
medical comorbidities. These cases, which are collated in the form
of datasets, should adhere to emerging guidance as to what
constitutes transparent and complete reporting. Derived from the
seminal ‘Datasheets for Datasets ’ effort, the recent ‘Healthsheet’
initiative has set forth healthcare-speci ﬁc standards around the
reporting of dataset transparency and diversity 35,36. This initiative
has also been endorsed by the ongoing STANDING Together
project, which will further serve to provide guidance around
minimising racial and ethical health inequalities in AI datasets
dataset composition 37. These initiatives will prove crucial to
regulators, commissioners, policymakers, and health data institu-
tions who will have greater guidance as to how to assess whether
the dataset is diverse and represents all segments of populations,
including underserved groups. Conversely, creation of represen-
tative patient vignette sets will allow regulators to further validate
symptom checkers during the approval process and ‘benchmark’
symptom checker performance. Providing developers access to a
proportion of vignettes (i.e., a development dataset) will
additionally improve transparency and understanding of cases
that symptom checkers are expected to be able to process during
the validation process.
For healthcare researchers . All the above recommendations offer
healthcare researchers many avenues for further work. Within this,
it is important that digital health studies that form the basis for
symptom checkers are carried out with greater methodological
rigour and transparency. First, vignettes used in audit studies
examining symptom checker accuracy should be openly acces-
sible. Within this systematic review, except for Semigran et al. and
Hill et al., the vignettes that are inputted into symptom checkers
are not published as supplementary data in the included studies.
Thus, reproducibility and validation of audit study ﬁndings would
be greatly aided by publishing the clinical vignettes used. Second,
the majority of the included studies involved clinicians, not
patients, inputting either clinical vignette details or reported
symptoms from patient records into symptom checkers. However,
these ‘clinician-vetted’ symptoms may differ from patients ’
characterisation of their own physical symptoms and may
therefore produce differing symptom checker results and limit
generalisability. One potential avenue for further symptom
checker validation could involve prospective data collection (i.e.,
from outpatient clinics and ED waiting areas) and comparison of
results with clinician diagnoses. This approach would also be more
representative of the role a symptom checker may play within the
patient journey and a valuable method of determining patient
attitudes and acceptability of symptom checkers. Third, to our
knowledge, continued and persistent longitudinal assessment of
symptom checker performance is not currently available in the
literature. Several studies have suggested that symptom checkers
performance may improve over time given increased exposure to
data upon which an AI-centred model may iterate. This is
especially pertinent as adaptive AI algorithms (where there is
continuous learning from new data and subsequent algorithm
modiﬁcation) are incorporated into symptom checkers. Thus,
these systems may have variable performance over time, which
will require quanti ﬁcation with future longitudinal studies invol-
ving benchmarking clinical vignettes and pertinent population
subgroup analyses. Fourth, while symptom checkers ful ﬁl the
need for telemedicine, further work should also evaluate whether
symptom checkers truly are better than more traditional
telephone triage lines. Previous work by Semigran et al. directly
comparing physician and symptom checker (Human Dx) diag-
nostic accuracy noted signi ﬁcant outperformance by physicians 38.
Furthermore, comparison of symptom checker and search engine
performance is needed. Search engines (e.g., Google, Bing, or
Yahoo) are often a ﬁrst port-of-call for self-diagnosis, though
concerns regarding their use for this purpose have been
raised1,39,40. More importantly, there is an unmet need for
educating patients about using symptom checkers, especially
about their limitations. While the variation in digital health literacy
has previously been established, more effort is required to address
and correct its socio-economic drivers.
Finally, one of the most important questions that have arisen
from our review centres around what constitutes acceptable
performance within this class of technologies, given that these
technologies can be adopted across various clinical pathways and
health systems, with differing degrees of clinical oversight. Given
the variance in performance that we highlight across studies, it is
imperative that the evidence produced by healthcare researchers
and used by regulators, national policymakers and commissioners
is transparent and complete, particularly around the reporting of
reference standards and clinical context, which are key factors
required for a health technology assessment. Although previous
work has directly compared symptom checker and physician
performance38, distinct evidence needs to be generated against
speciﬁc clinical pathways and health systems in order to facilitate
fair appraisals. These reporting and evidential tenets are upheld by
guideline initiatives produced by The EQUATOR Network, such as
CONSORT-AI and STARD-AI, which mandate the reporting of such
key study characteristics for AI-centred clinical trial and diagnostic
test accuracy studies, respectively 41,42.
CONCLUSIONS
In this systematic review, symptom checkers diagnostic and triage
accuracy varied substantially and was generally low. Variation
exists between different symptom checkers and the conditions
being assessed; this raises safety and regulatory concerns. Given
the increasing trend of telemedicine use and, even the endorse-
ment of certain applications by the NHS, further work should seek
to re-examine the regulation associated with these technologies
W. Wallace et al.
7
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022)   118 

as well as establish datasets to support their development and
improve patient safety.
METHODS
Eligibility criteria
This systematic review was conducted according to the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
(PRISMA) guidelines and was registered in the PROSPERO registry
(ID: CRD42021271022)43. Prospective and retrospective vignette or
audit studies were included. Studies that utilised an online or
application-based service designed to input symptoms and
biodata (i.e., age and gender) to generate diagnoses, health
advice and direct patients to appropriate services were included.
All study populations, including patients, patient cases or
simulated vignettes (i.e., cases written by clinicians) were included.
Studies were included regardless of the condition(s) being
assessed or the symptom checker used. Included studies had to
quantitatively evaluate the accuracy of the symptom checker
service. Excluded articles included descriptive studies, abstracts,
commentaries, and study protocols. Only articles written in the
English language were included.
Search
Following PRISMA recommendations, an electronic database
search was conducted using MEDLINE and Web of Science to
include articles up to 15 February 2021 (search strategy detailed in
Supplementary text). Reference lists of the studies included in the
review synthesis were examined for additional articles. Search
results were then imported into Mendeley (RELX, UK) for duplicate
removal and study selection. Screening of articles was performed
independently by two investigators (W.W. and C.C.). Uncertainties
were resolved through discussion with a third and fourth author
(S.C. and V.S.).
Data extraction and analysis
Key data were extracted and tabulated from the included studies,
including details of study design, participants, interventions,
symptom checkers used, comparators and reported study out-
comes. The location of the study was determined based on the
afﬁliation of the corresponding author. Data extraction was
performed independently by two investigators (W.W. and C.C.).
The primary outcomes of this systematic review were (1) the
accuracy of symptom checkers for providing the correct diagnosis
and (2) the accuracy of subsequent triage advice given (i.e.,
whether the acuity of the medical issue was correctly identi ﬁed,
and patients were signposted to appropriate services). The
secondary outcome of assessing variation in recommendations
within studies of consistent clinical input data can be calculated
from these extracted outcomes. Due to the heterogeneity of the
included studies ’design, methodology and reported outcomes, a
meta-analysis was not performed. A narrative synthesis of the
included studies and pre-speci ﬁed outcomes was instead carried
out. Study bias was assessed using the Quality Assessment of
Diagnostic Accuracy Studies (QUADAS-2) tool 44. The risk of bias
was assessed across the four domains by two investigators (W.W.
and S.C.), and any disagreements were discussed and resolved by
a third author (V.S.). The risk of bias of each domain was
categorised as low, unclear or high.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The search strategy is available in the Supplementary material ; any additional data
are available upon request.
Received: 3 January 2022; Accepted: 25 July 2022;
REFERENCES
1. Semigran, H. L., Linder, J. A., Gidengil, C. & Mehrotra, A. Evaluation of symptom
checkers for self diagnosis and triage: audit study. BMJ 351, h3480 (2015).
2. Mueller, J. et al. Web use for symptom appraisal of physical health conditions: a
systematic review. J. Med. Internet Res. 19, e202 (2017).
3. Prescott, C. Internet access – households and individuals, Great Britain: 2020. Ofﬁce
for National Statistics https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/
householdcharacteristics/homeinternetandsocialmediausage/bulletins/
internetaccesshouseholdsandindividuals/2020 (2020).
4. Berry, A. C. Online symptom checker applications: syndromic surveillance for
international health. Ochsner J. 18, 298 –299 (2018).
5. McIntyre, D. & Chow, C. K. Waiting time as an indicator for health services under
strain: a narrative review. Inquiry 57, 004695802091030 (2020).
6. Gottliebsen, K. & Petersson, G. Limited evidence of bene ﬁts of patient operated
intelligent primary care triage tools: ﬁndings of a literature review. BMJ Heal. Care
Inform. 27, e100114 (2020).
7. NHS 111 powered by Babylon; Outcomes evaluation . https://assets.babylonhealth.
com/nhs/NHS-111-Evaluation-of-outcomes.pdf (2017).
8. NHS England. 1 in 4 GP appointments potentially avoidable. NHS England https://
www.england.nhs.uk/2015/10/gp-appointments/.
9. McHale, P. et al. Who uses emergency departments inappropriately and when – a
national cross-sectional study using a monitoring data system. BMC Med. 11, 258
(2013).
10. Fraser, H., Coiera, E. & Wong, D. Safety of patient-facing digital symptom
checkers. Lancet 392, 2263 –2264 (2018).
11. Blanchard, S. NHS-backed G. P. chatbot is branded a ‘public health danger ’. Daily
Mail Online https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-6751393/NHS-backed-GP-
chatbot-branded-public-health-danger.html (2019).
12. Das, S. It ’s hysteria, not a heart attack, GP app Babylon tells women. The Sunday
Times https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/its-hysteria-not-a-heart-attack-gp-app-
tells-women-gm2vxbrqk# (2019).
13. Adegoke, Y. ‘Calm down dear, it ’s only an aneurysm ’– why doctors need to take
women’s pain seriously. The Guardian https://www.theguardian.com/
commentisfree/2019/oct/16/doctors-women-pain-heart-attack-hysteria (2019).
14. Chambers, D. et al. Digital and online symptom checkers and health assessment/
triage services for urgent health problems: systematic review. BMJ Open 9,
e027743 (2019).
15. Powley, L., McIlroy, G., Simons, G. & Raza, K. Are online symptoms checkers useful
for patients with in ﬂammatory arthritis? BMC Musculoskelet. Disord. 17, 362
(2016).
16. Nazario Arancibia, J. C. et al. Evaluation of a diagnostic decision support system
for the triage of patients in a hospital emergency department. Int. J. Interact.
Multimed. Artif. Intell. 5,6 0 –67 (2019).
17. Shen, C., Nguyen, M., Gregor, A., Isaza, G. & Beattie, A. Accuracy of a popular
online symptom checker for ophthalmic diagnoses. JAMA Ophthalmol. 137, 690
(2019).
18. Hill, M. G., Sim, M. & Mills, B. The quality of diagnosis and triage advice provided
by free online symptom checkers and apps in Australia. Med. J. Aust. 212,
514–518 (2020).
1 9 . Y u ,S .W .Y .e ta l .T r i a g ea c c u r a c yo fo n l i n es y m p t o mc h e c k e r sf o ra c c i d e n ta n d
emergency department patients. H o n g .K o n gJ .E m e r g .M e d .27, 217 –222
(2020).
20. Yoshida, Y. & Thomas Clark, G. Accuracy of online symptom checkers for diag-
nosis of orofacial pain and oral medicine disease. J. Prosthodont. Res. 65, 168–190
(2021).
21. Hageman, M. G. J. S., Anderson, J., Blok, R., Bossen, J. K. J. & Ring, D. Internet self-
diagnosis in hand surgery. Hand 10, 565 –569 (2015).
22. Berry, A. C. et al. Online symptom checker diagnostic and triage accuracy for HIV
and hepatitis C. Epidemiol. Infect. 147, e104 (2019).
23. Gilbert, S. et al. How accurate are digital symptom assessment apps for sug-
gesting conditions and urgency advice? A clinical vignettes comparison to GPs.
BMJ Open 10, e040269 (2020).
24. Revisiting the «Swiss Cheese» Model of Accidents. Eurocontrol Experimental
Centre https://www.eurocontrol.int/publication/revisiting-swiss-cheese-model-
accidents (2006).
W. Wallace et al.
8
npj Digital Medicine (2022)   118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

25. Williams, B. & Song, J. J. Y. Are simulated patients effective in facilitating devel-
opment of clinical competence for healthcare students? A scoping review. Adv.
Simul. 1,1 –9 (2016).
26. Peabody, J., Luck, J., Glassman, P., Dresselhaus, T. & Lee, M. Comparison of
vignettes, standardized patients, and chart abstraction: a prospective validation
study of 3 methods for measuring quality. JAMA 283, 1715 –1722 (2000).
27. El-Osta, A. et al. What is the suitability of clinical vignettes in benchmarking the
performance of online symptom checkers? An audit study. BMJ Open 12, e053566
(2022).
28. Ceney, A. et al. Accuracy of online symptom checkers and the potential impact
on service utilisation. PLoS One 16, e0254088 (2021).
29. Iacobucci, G. Row over Babylon ’s chatbot shows lack of regulation. BMJ 368,
m815 (2020).
30. FDA. Software as a Medical Device (SaMD) (2018).
31. Knitza, J. et al. Patient ’s perception of digital symptom assessment technologies
in rheumatology: results from a multicentre study. Front. public Heal. 10, 844669
(2022).
32. Kleinert, S. et al. A real-world rheumatology registry and research consortium: The
German RheumaDatenRhePort (RHADAR) registry. J. Med. Internet Res. 23,e 2 8 1 6 4
(2021).
33. Knitza, J. et al. Accuracy, patient-perceived usability, and acceptance of
two symptom checkers (Ada and Rheport) in rheumatology: interim results from
a randomized controlled crossover trial. Arthritis Res. Ther . 23, 112 (2021).
34. Larrazabal, A. J., Nieto, N., Peterson, V., Milone, D. H. & Ferrante, E. Gender
imbalance in medical imaging datasets produces biased classi ﬁers for computer-
aided diagnosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 12592 –12594 (2020).
35. Gebru, T. et al. Datasheets for datasets. Commun. ACM 64,8 6 –92 (2018).
36. Rostamzadeh, N. et al. Healthsheet: development of a transparency artifact for
health datasets. J. ACM 37, 29 (2022).
37. STANDING Together Working Group. STANDING Together . https://
www.datadiversity.org/ (2022).
3 8 . S e m i g r a n ,H .L . ,L e v i n e ,D .M . ,N u n d y ,S .&M e h r o t r a ,A .C o m p a r i s o no fp h y -
sician and computer diagnostic accuracy. JAMA Intern. Med. 176, 1860 –1861
(2016).
39. North, F., Ward, W. J., Varkey, P. & Tulledge-Scheitel, S. M. Should you search the
internet for information about your acute symptom? Telemed. J. E. Health. 18,
213–218. https://home.liebertpub.com/tmj (2012).
40. Tang, H. & Ng, J. H. K. Googling for a diagnosis — use of Google as a diagnostic
aid: internet based study. BMJ 333, 1143 –1145 (2006).
41. Sounderajah, V. et al. Developing speci ﬁc reporting guidelines for diagnostic
accuracy studies assessing AI interventions: The STARD-AI Steering Group. Nat.
Med. 26, 807 –808 (2020).
42. Liu, X. et al. Reporting guidelines for clinical trial reports for interventions
involving arti ﬁcial intelligence: the CONSORT-AI extension. Nat. Med. 26,
1364–1374 (2020).
43. Page, M. J. et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting
systematic reviews. BMJ 372, n71 (2021).
44. Whiting, P. F. et al. Quadas-2: a revised tool for the quality assessment of diag-
nostic accuracy studies. Ann. Intern. Med. 155, 529 –536 (2011).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Infrastructure support for this research was provided by the NIHR Imperial Biomedical
Research Centre.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
W.W., C.C. and S.C. contributed to the data collection and analysis. L.H., A.A., F.M.I. and
P.N. contributed to the manuscript writing. H.A., S.R.M., V.S. and A.D. contributed to the
critical revision of the manuscript as well as the initial study conception. All authors
read and critically commented on drafts of the study, including the latest version, and
jointly take responsibility for the decision to submit this work for publication.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-022-00667-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Viknesh
Sounderajah.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
W. Wallace et al.
9
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022)   118 

