Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
A physiological approach for assessing
human survivability and liveability to
heat in a changing climate
Jennifer Vanos 1 , Gisel Guzman-Echavarria2,J a n eW .B a l d w i n3,4,
Coen Bongers 5,6,K r i s t i eL .E b i7 &O l l i eJ a y 6
Most studies projecting human survivability limits to extreme heat with cli-
mate change use a 35 °C wet-bulb temperature (Tw) threshold without inte-
grating variations in human physiology. This study applies physiological and
biophysical principles for young and older adults, in sun or shade, to improve
current estimates of survivability and introduce liveability (maximum safe,
sustained activity) under current and future climates. Our physiology-based
survival limits show a vast underestimation of risks by the 35 °C Tw model in
hot-dry conditions. Updated survivability limits correspond to Tw~25.8–34.1 °C
(young) and ~21.9–33.7 °C (old)— 0.9–13.1 °C lower than Tw =3 5° C .F o ro l d e r
female adults, estimates are ~7.2–1 3 . 1° Cl o w e rt h a n3 5° Ci nd r yc o n d i t i o n s .
Liveability declines with sun exposure and humidity, yet most dramatically
with age (2.5–3.0 METs lower for older adults). Reductions in safe activity for
younger and older adults between the present and future indicate a stronger
impact from aging than warming.
Adverse health impacts of extreme heat exposure are expected to rise
globally due to a warming climate, urban-induced warming, and a
growing and aging population 1,2. The concerns for human health,
productivity, and well-being are greater in humid climates and for
vulnerable populations3–5, such as older adults, unhoused, and/or
those with chronic diseases. Therefore, robust models to assess cur-
rent heat-health impacts and project future risks must incorporate
speciﬁc vulnerabilities and diverse environmental contexts6.
Methods to project future heat stress risk can be broadly cate-
gorized into epidemiology/econometric and physiology-based
approaches, which have contrasting bene ﬁts and limitations. Epide-
miology/econometric approaches are empirical in nature, analyzing
time series of historical temperature paired with particular health
consequences (e.g., morbidity or mortality) across populations to
determine heat-health relationships. These studies often ﬁnd higher
rates of cardiovascular and respiratory deaths associated with high
ambient temperatures. Future health burdens from heat can be
estimated by applying these relati onships to climate model outputs
(i.e., daily temperature) under different warming scenarios7,8.E m p i r i -
cal approaches are based on real-life outcomes and the range of rea-
listic living conditions, and they can explore the cumulative effects of
exposures over multiple days. However, two limitations for climate
change projections include 1) assumptions needed to extrapolate
results to warmer temperatures than observed in the historical sample9
and 2) ambiguity regarding the role of humidity in heat-health
outcomes10. While some epidemiological studies ﬁnd a relationship
between mortality in the heat and humidity 11,m o s t ﬁnd minimal
associations between humidity and heat-health outcomes12.G i v e nt h a t
speciﬁc humidity is robustly expected to increase with global warming,
this uncertainty is a key research gap for epidemiology-based projec-
tions of future heat stress.
Physiology-based studies of future heat stress risk employ rela-
tionships between the thermal environment and health outcomes
based on human energy balance considerations, with parameters
Received: 14 March 2023
Accepted: 1 November 2023
Check for updates
1School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.2School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning, Arizona State University, Tempe,
AZ, USA. 3Department of Earth System Science, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.4Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Palisades, NY, USA.
5Department of Medical Sciences, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.6Heat and Health Research Incubator, University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.7Center for Health and the Global Environment, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. e-mail: jvanos@asu.edu
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

constrained by studies of physiologic processes. In contrast to epide-
miology/econometric approaches, physiology-based studies of heat-
health outcomes consistently ﬁnd a robust role of atmospheric
humidity in heat stress via its modulation of evaporative cooling from
sweat10. However, physiology studies are limited in not directly
observing health outcomes, such as hospitalization or death, and
employ idealized conditions from thermal chamber studies.
A range of physiology-based metrics has been applied to project
future heat stress. Sherwood & Huber 12 introduced a 35 °C wet bulb
temperature (Tw) threshold that would result in death after 6 h of
exposure and applied this threshold to project future adaptability
limits under varying levels of warming. Since then, numerous studies
have used this approach, wherein a psychometric Tw of 35 °C assumes
death13–17.T h eT w of 35 °C represents a thermodynamic limit to heat
exchange, whereby the human body becomes an adiabatic system,
assuming the person is indoors or shaded, unclothed, completely
sedentary, fully heat acclimatized, and of average size without ther-
moregulatory impairments12. As an example of a different metric,
Dunne et al. 18 estimated future reductions in labor capacity
under different warming scenarios using established guidelines for
physical labor under different wet bulb globe temperature levels.
While these studies incorporate valuable information about humidity
and physiology more realistically than epidemiological studies, their
thermal physiology theory remains relatively unsophisticated. These
approaches cannot capture complexities and personal characteristics
affecting human thermoregulation (e.g., body size, activity
levels, clothing, or physiological restrictions — such as sweating — to
thermoregulation6,19), which may cause substantial errors.
To be useful, heat-health projections should realistically account
for factors that increase health risks, such as individual physical char-
acteristics and physiological impairments, as well as interventions that
modify or decrease impacts (e.g., lowering metabolic rate; behaviors
to reduce exposures). Moreover, models should incorporate ranges in
environmental parameters that, together with temperature, result in
speciﬁc thermoregulatory effects (e.g., dry, humid, sun/shade,
windspeed)19. Physiological and biophysical models offer new oppor-
tunities to assess how humans might live and work in a warmer future
rather than merely determining the prospects for life and death. Here,
we demonstrate a unique approach using physiological principles that
align with human thermal responses to heat (e.g., heat strain) to
overcome simpliﬁed approaches that miss essential physiologic and
behavioral factors in the heat.
Heat strain, characterized by thermal, cardiovascular, and renal
strain, can lead to adverse health outcomes such as heat exhaustion,
heat stroke, or cardiovascular collapse. Risk is higher in people with pre-
existing illnesses (e.g., cardiovascular disease 20,o ra r e
immunocompromised21). Aging 1,21, certain medications 22,a n dd i f f e r -
ences in body composition 23 may exacerbate heat strain due to
impairments to sweating and/or bloodﬂow or the internal management
of body heat storage. Conversely,ﬁtness24, heat acclimatization25,a n d
behavioral adaptations26–28 protect against excessive heat strain. This
study and others assessing survivability limits (e.g., refs.12,14,16)e s t i -
mate deaths from critical high core temperatures causing heat
stroke, where a complex cascade of events29 ultimately leads to multi-
organ failure30,31 and often death29. Hence, we model heat stroke deaths
(hyperthermia) and do not model the two other common types of heat-
related deaths: cardiovascular collapse and renal failure, acknowledging
that heat stroke deaths are a fractionof total excess heat-related deaths.
A human would experience heat stroke death from hyperthermia
on 99.9% of occasions when an individual ’s core temperature (T core)
exceeds 43 °C29,32 (see Table1). Thus, we deﬁne the limit of survivability
as reaching a Tcore of 43 °C in 3- or 6-hour exposure windows to allow
for comparison with the T w of 35 °C assumption (heat stroke death
after 6 hours). Liveability is the maximum internal heat production, or
level of physical activity, that a person can generate without a
sustained positive rate of heat storage in the prevailing environment,
thus allowing safe, sustained work and play for an extended period.
The realistic ﬁnal Tw value for the limits of survivability or liveability
will differ by person (age, body size) and climate (dry versus humid;
sun versus shade), and thus isﬂexible (i.e., the limits will differ). Hence,
while we state a ﬁnal T core at which heat stroke death will almost
inevitably occur, our approach does not assume a unique Tw threshold;
rather, hundreds of T w thresholds are possible depending on differ-
ences in people and conditions modeled, with wide-ranging opportu-
nities of the model in future research.
The overarching goal of this study is to improve heat survivability
modeling frameworks and approaches used in climate change
research and introduce an approach to assess liveability. As an initial
step towards these advances, we apply a whole-body human heat
exchange model to estimate heat stroke deaths and maximum/safe
activity intensity. We focus on two subpopulation types (younger
(~18–30 y) and older (>65 y) female adults), considering sweat rate
impairments (due to older age) and heat exposures in the sun or shade
across an array of air temperature (T air) and humidity levels. We esti-
mate 1) a range of survivability conditions for humans, particularly
where deviations from the 35 °C Tw model exist, and 2) the liveability of
humans based on levels of physical activity that can be safely carried
out without sustained positive heat storage. Finally, we apply the new
liveability approach using global climate model (GCM) data to esti-
mate liveability at a global scale, under current and projected climates.
An overview of environmental conditions, populations modeled,
and assessment types included herein is provided in Fig.1.W ed on o t
demonstrate the sensitivity to illness or health status (including
acclimatization) in the population, activity velocity, personal cooling
strategies, or an ensemble of climate projections— investigations that
are worthy future extensions of the methods described in this paper,
but out of scope for the present work (see below).
Results
Survivability
All survivability results are pres ented by age (younger versus older
female adults) for discrete 3- and 6-hour heat exposure durations.
These durations are consistent, and thus comparable, with past studies
assessing future survivability12 and the highest time resolution data
commonly saved from GCM simulations. Results are shown for mod-
erate to extreme combinations of temperature and humidity that may
occasionally be reached today, both indoors and outdoors, but more
frequently in the future32. Further, we acknowledge that in most cir-
cumstances, human agency allows people to seek shade to reduce
their heat load 33; hence, we primarily focus on shaded survivability
results, allowing a more direct comparison with the T w of 35 °C
adaptability hypothesis.
The updated physiologic survivability curves — or the environ-
mental limits indicating heat stroke — by exposure duration and age
group are shown in Fig. 2 (thick black lines). These environmental
ranges, or zones, indicate that survivability are larger for young adults
(Fig. 2a). As conditions become drier, the survivability area declines
and the curves bend down due to sweating restrictions, a feature not
captured by the traditional T w of 35 °C approach. These shifts are
observed at the intersection between zones 3 (pink), 4 (purple), and 5
(gray) in Fig. 2, each indicating a different reason for the increase in
Tcore towards death— i.e., due to environmental restrictions ( Emaxenv
)
(pink), sweating restrictions ( Emaxsweat
) (purple), or both ( Emaxenv
and
Emaxsweat
) (gray) (see Methods and SM).
The 6-hour survival limit for Tw differs depending on the magni-
tudes of Tair and relative humidity (RH). For example, at an RH of 50%, a
healthy young adult can withstand conditions up to 43.3 °C T air
(representing a Tw of 33.6 °C). However, under drier conditions (RH of
25%), the same young, healthy adult may withstand a Tair up to 49.9 °C
(or a T w of only 31.3 °C). The survivability in these dry conditions is
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 2

impacted by the body’s ability to produce sweat, as visualized by the
growth of zone 4 (curve shifting down) in Fig.2 as conditions become
drier. For older adults, this downward shift is prominent at a lower Tair
and higher RH, where these older individuals can survive only a 6-hour
exposure at a Tair of 45.4 °C at 25% RH (Tw of 27.8 °C), which is 3.5 °C Tw
lower than for young adults, and 7.2 °C lower than the 35 °C Tw.
When expressing the survivability limits of the physiological
model in terms of the critical T w within very humid (RH > 90%) and
shaded conditions, values are broadly in agreement with the tradi-
tional Tw =3 5° Ca s s u m p t i o n(~0 . 7–1.3 °C lower Tw for a 6-hour dura-
tion) (see Table 2, Fig. 3). However, in drier conditions, the
physiological survival T w limits are much lower (distance between
survivability line and Tw =3 5° C l i n e , F i g .3). As such, the most critical
differences from the T w = 35 °C assumption occur as conditions
become very hot and dry (Tair > 40 °C and RH < 25%). For young adults,
the physiological T w survival limit ranges from 25.8 –31.3 °C (or
3.8–9.2 °C lower than 35 °C). These dry-condition limits are reduced
further for older adults to a T w of 21.9–27.8 °C (or 7.2 –13.1 °C lower
than 35 °C). Further, shaded older adults would not survive a 6-hour
exposure beyond Tw =2 1 . 9° C a t 1 0 % R H ( t h u s Tair =4 6 . 4° C ) ; y e t t h e
Tw = 35 °C assumption presumes they could endure a 6-hour exposure
at a Tair of 60 °C+ at the same RH.
Liveability
The limit to safe physical activities differs by T air,R H ,a g e ,a n ds u n
exposure (Fig.4). Mmax, represented by metabolic equivalents (METs),
is higher under cooler, drier conditions. In shade at Tair =2 5° C , y o u n g
adults can safely reachMmax values around 5.0 METs (e.g., dancing) for
humid conditions while maintaining thermal equilibrium, with even
higher possible Mmax (8.4 METs, or running) in drier environments.
When sun-exposed at the same Tair,t h eMmax limit decreases to ~3.9–7.4
METs (e.g., housework, climbing stairs). As Tair rises in Fig. 4,t h eMmax
declines sharply for RH above 75%. In such humid conditions, young
adults reach a limit in their ability to perform any activity safely at a Tair
of ~35.5 °C (or 34.0 °C T air for older adults). Accordingly, the hatched
zone in Fig. 4 highlights the range of conditions in which no additional
work >1.5 METs can be safely performed. The lower limit corresponds to
the transition from compensable, or safe heat stress, to uncompensable
heat stress when the internal body temperature starts to rise.
Mmax decreases with age (Fig. 5), a factor that is considerably
higher under dry conditions. For example, at high T air and low RH,
young and healthy adults can do ~2.5 –3.0 METs more activity (e.g.,
sitting/resting versus walking) than older adults, who are more limited
by their sweat rate. The differences between the two groups decrease
(down to ~0.6–0.8 METs less) as humidity rises and temperatures drop.
Accordingly, there is a wider range of conditions where older people
can only rest safely (i.e., survivable but not livable). Direct solar
radiation exposure also decreases Mmax to a certain extent in both
groups (Figs. 4c, d and 5b). This effect is increasingly worse in more
humid environments for any Tair. As a reference, under the same T air
and RH, sunlit exposures reduce activity levels by 1.0 MET in young
adults and 0.86 METs in older adults compared to shaded.
Table 1 | Different deﬁnitions and approaches to survivability and liveability (including terminologies) in recent climate change
and physiology literature
Term De ﬁnition/Use References
Survivability Individual ’s core temperature exceeds 43 °C within a 3- or 6-h exposure window. Current paper
Adaptabilitya Limit An extreme upper limit of T w = 35 °C to human heat adaptation due to climate warming, above which dissipation of heat
becomes impossible when exposed for extended periods (6 h), resulting in death.
Sherwood and Huber12
Livabilitya The maximum safe internal heat production/physical activity that a person can generate without a sustained rate of
positive heat storage in the prevailing environment, thus allowing people to safely sustain work or play for an extended
period.
Current paper
Critical Tw Critical environmental limits (“adaptability threshold”) for compensability (the deﬁnition of liveability in current paper),
valid for 1.8 METs (light, everyday activity).
Vecellio et al.39
aThe term habitability may be used as a way to refer to liveability or adaptability in some studies as well.
Fig. 1 | Overview of environmental conditions, populations, assumptions, and
assessment types examined in the present study. Full model presented in Sup-
plementary Information. All variables in the model remain constant during the
exposure (e.g., wind, clothing, sweat rate, skin wettedness). Tcore Core temperature,
Tair Air temperature, RH Relative humidity.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 3

Global climate projections using liveability analysis
Results are presented here for GFDL ESM4; all MPI ESM1.2 results can
be found in the SM. Signiﬁcant declines in Mmax between present-day
(2016–2025) and end-of-century (2091 –2100) are projected (Fig. 6),
with exceptions in some locations above 50°N, the Himalayas, south
New Zealand, and the Andean Cordillera. These global estimates
suggest a likely average (median) decrease inMmax (from present-day
to end-of-century) of –0.25 METs following SSP2-4.5 for young,
healthy adults (Fig. 6a) during days when Tair >2 5° C( –0.64 METs for
SSP5-8.5).
The median Mmax for the current decade when Tair is >25 °C (Fig.
S.9) is higher (up to 5.9 METs) across extratropical and mountainous
regions (e.g., Ethiopia and the Andean Cordillera in northern South
America). In contrast, the lowestMmax estimates, reaching an average
minimum of 4 METs, are found across coastal areas and the most
humid regions in the tropics (i.e., northern India and Bangladesh, the
Amazon and Congo Rainforests, southeastern Asia, Eastern China, Gulf
of Mexico). In such areas (and other regions covering the lower
quartile with major Mmax changes), Mmax average declines of >0.3
METs following SSP2-4.5 are expected by 2100 (see Fig. 6a, b) for
Fig. 2 | New Tw survivability limits for younger and older adults under shaded/
indoor or sun-exposed conditions.Physiological heat stroke Tw survivability
limits (thick black line), modeled across 6 h of constant exposure for young adults
(a, c) and older adults (b, d) in shaded/indoor (a, b) and sun-exposed/outdoor (c, d)
conditions. Zones 1 and 2 (yellow shades) represent areas of survivability, whereas
zones 3–5 are non-survivable areas due to evaporative restrictions from the
environment (zone 3), sweating limits (zone 4), or both (zone 5) (see also
Supplementary Fig. S1). Tw = 35 °C line is shown by the thin gray line. These phy-
siological survivability limits illustrate the environmental conditions in which the
body would reach a deadly Tcore (i.e., after reaching uncompensable heat stress and
accumulating enough heat to increase base Tcore by 6 °C, from 37 °C (normother-
mia) to 43 °C (heat stroke)). (See Supplementary Figs. S2 and 3 for vapor pressure
and speciﬁc humidity on y-axis, respectively). Source data are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 4

young adults, which would more than double under SSP5-8.5
(–0.73 METs).
Following SSP2-4.5, large areas will experience >5% reduction in
median Mmax towards the end-of-century (Supplementary Fig. S.11)
during warm conditions, including warm coastal areas and savannahs
in North, South, and Central America, the Caribbean, the Sahel, much
of Eastern Africa, the Arabian Peninsula, Southeast Asia, northern
Australia, the Amazon, southeastern U.S., and scattered areas in Cen-
tral and Eastern Europe, and Central and Eastern Asia. Many of these
areas already experience frequent Tair >2 5° C( > 6 0 % o f t h e t i m e ) a n d
already-low Mmax (Fig. 6c, Supplementary Fig. S.12); the further
reduction in Mmax will add major liveability challenges as climate
change progresses. Finally, by end-of-century, select areas (Arabian
Peninsula, Northern India, Bangladesh) are projected to see a
signiﬁcant increase in conditions that are survivable but not livable for
young adults, reaching a frequency of 5 –7% (6 months/decade) for
SSP5-8.5 (see hatched zones in Fig. 4, Supplementary Informa-
tion (SI) S.13).
The Mmax distribution for select locations in Fig. 7 shows a more
pronounced decrease in safe activity in older versus younger adults
compared to the decline expected from projected warming (i.e.,
individual age and age of the overall population can be a stronger heat
risk predictor than warming due to climate change). For regions
around Riyadh, Cartagena, New Delhi, and Dhaka, there is already a
high frequency of time where an older adult cannot presently perform
more than 2.5 METs of activity (slow walking). Thus, moving forward,
these locations will increasingly become unliveable despite being
survivable (increases of frequencies at 1.5 METs or less for old adults,
Table 2 | Physiological limit based on our physiological wet-bulb survival temperature (Tw), as modeled in the present study,
and differences from the 35 °C Tw survivability assumption [i.e., (ΔTw =T w– 35)]
Shaded/Indoors
Relative humidity 10% 25% 50% 75% 90% 100%
Exposure time Age
3-hour Young 18 –40 yr T w limit to survive (°C) 26.7 31.9 34.3 34.7 34.8 34.9
ΔTw (Tw–35) (°C) ( –8.3) ( –3.1) ( –0.7) ( –0.3) ( –0.2) ( –0.1)
Corresponding Tair (°C) 54.7 50.7 44.0 38.7 36.3 34.9
Older >65 yr T w limit to survive (°C) 23.14 29.19 33.2 34.27 34.62 34.8
ΔTw (Tw–35) (°C) ( –11.9) ( –5.8) ( –1.8) ( –0.7) ( –0.4) ( –0.2)
Corresponding Tair (°C) 48.6 47.2 42.8 38.3 36.1 34.8
6-hour Young 18 –40 yr T w limit to survive (°C) 25.8 31.3 33.6 34.0 34.1 34.3
ΔTw (Tw–35) (°C) ( –9.2) ( –3.8) ( –1.4) ( –1.0) ( –0.9) ( –0.7)
Corresponding Tair (°C) 53.2 49.9 43.3 38 35.6 34.3
Older >65 yr T w limit to survive (°C) 21.9 27.8 32.6 33.4 33.7 34.0
ΔTw (Tw–35) (°C) ( –13.1) ( –7.2) ( –2.4) ( –1.6) ( –1.3) ( –1.0)
Corresponding Tair (°C) 46.4 45.4 42.1 37.4 35.2 34.0
Data are shown for varying relative humidity levels under shaded conditions, along with corresponding air temperature. Each humidity level is shownb yt h ed a r kb l u eh o r i z o n t a ll i n e so nF i g .3.
Differences are stratiﬁed by exposure duration (3 or 6 h) and age group, depicting a vast underestimation of impacts using traditional Tw of 35 °C limit. Values for sun-exposed/outdoor conditions are
in Supplementary Table S.1.
Fig. 3 | Updated survival limits (thick blue line) in extreme heat versus the Tw of
35 ºC assumption (black thick line).Comparison of the Tw =3 5° Ca s s u m p -
tion (black) with our physiological survivability limits (blue), based on 3-hour
(dashed lines) and 6-hour (solid lines) of constant exposure at given air tempera-
ture and relative humidity combinations within shaded/indoors conditions. Graphs
indicate limits to survivability for (a) young and (b) older adults, wherein the limit is
based on reaching uncompensable heat stress and accumulating enough body heat
for a ﬁxed time of constant exposure to increase Tcore by 6 °C (from 37 °C (nor-
mothermia) to 43 °C (heat stroke)). Black lines show Tw values up to 37 °C to avoid
unrealistic conditions (thick line shows Tw of 35 °C), and horizontal dark blue lines
indicate the ΔTw values at RH levels of 10, 25, 50, 75, and 90, and 100% in Table 2.
See Supplementary Figs. S4 and 5 for vapor pressure and speciﬁc humidity on y-
axis, respectively. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 5

Fig. 4 | Estimates of liveability at varying combinations of air temperature and
relative humidity.Liveability estimates based on maximum safe metabolic rate
(Mmax ) that a person can generate without a sustained positive rate of heat storage
even with a maximal thermoregulatory response. Results are presented across a
range of air temperature and relative humidity for younger (a, c) and older adults
(b, d) in shaded (top) or sun-exposed (bottom) steady-state environments. The
new 3-hour survivability line is shown in purple; constant Tw values are shown by
the solid black lines until 37 °C to avoid unrealistic conditions, with Tw =3 5° C
shown by the thick black line. Activities by MET level range from no activity (sitting
~1.5 METs), to housework (~3.0 METs), dancing (~5.0 METs), and heavy lifting
(~7.0 METs). The hatched area indicates conditions that are survivable but not
livable (i.e., people cannot increase their activity without continuously storing heat
inside the body, which will lead to a continuous rise in core temperature, but heat
stroke death after a 3-hour exposure would not occur). Icons indicate MET-
equivalent activities according to Ainsworth et al.56. Circles indicate critical Tw limits
reported by Wolf et al.62 for minimal (~1.8 METs–ﬁlled circles) and light physical
activity (~3.2 METs–open circles). Note: 1 MET corresponds to complete rest. See
Supplementary Figs. S6 and 7 for vapor pressure and speciﬁch u m i d i t yo ny - a x i s ,
respectively. Icons provided by Icons8 (https://icons8.com). Source data are pro-
vided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 6

especially following SSP5-8.5). See also Supplementary Figs. S9–S15 for
further context.
Discussion
We report a new modeling approach for assessing the prospects of
human survivability and liveability due to extreme heat exposure that
can be applied in any climate regime and customized with population
groups with potential co-morbidities or thermoregulatory impair-
ments. This new approach integrates well-established and funda-
mental principles from thermal physiology and human biophysics and
accommodates 3- and 6-hour exposure windows aligning with outputs
from climate models and past survivability studies. Results encompass
current and future extreme heat (see Supplementary Figs. 14 and 15 for
future liveability ranges) across very hot and dry and very hot and
humid conditions, with risks increasing, or expected to increase, over
most of the world32,34.
For the past decade, the singular psychometric T w threshold of
35 °C (e.g., refs. 12,16,35) has been the conventional method for
assessing the survival limits of humans exposed to extreme heat with
climate change. Under such conditions, dry and evaporative heat
transfer avenues are abolished. Unable to dissipate any heat, the body
would retain all internally generated metabolic heat, inevitably leading
to heat stroke death within a 6-hour timeframe. While this approach
incorporates biophysical principles, it omits human thermal physiol-
ogy aspects (e.g., sweat response, hydration, acclimatization), and
cannot capture complexities of thermoregulation (e.g., body size,
activity, or physiological restrictions6,19), which the proposed physio-
logical model begins to overcome.
Omitting thermoregulatory responses to extreme heat can
result in a vast overestimation of the limits of human heat tolerance
(Fig. 2). Here, we show that under very humid conditions, the dif-
ference between models— expressed as a difference in the critical T w
at which humans are projected to survive — is modest (~1 °C). Indeed,
Sherwood and Huber 12 and others 36 acknowledge the danger of
moist heat. However, many users of the 35 °C T w limit (e.g.,
refs. 15,35) have recognized that it de ﬁnes a threshold for human
survivability or adaptability for the best-case scenario (i.e., highly ﬁt,
nude, well-ventilated, and shaded conditions) 37. Thus, the T w
threshold is likely lower for most people, which agrees with recent
work by Vecellio et al. 38 At higher T air accompanied by lower
humidity, drastic differences (e.g., ΔTw ~4 –13 °C) between the T w
35 °C assumption and our survivability approach emerge (Fig. 2a),
similar to climate chamber ﬁndings by Vecellio et al. 39 who applied
their empirical ﬁndings with global climate models 38. Our model
accounts for realistic sweat production (and therefore evaporative
potential) to physiologically plausible limits 40–42, which is the
underlying reason for the increasing dissociation from the T w 35 °C
limit in hot, dry air. The T w 35 °C threshold assumes no possible
sweat evaporation over the skin and thus theoretically obviates the
effect of any potential differences in sweating capacity. However,
impossibly high sweat rates are needed for survivability in very hot
and dry conditions, resulting in T w survivability values considerably
lower than 35 °C. Higher wind speed can also affect evaporative
cooling when sweat rates are suf ﬁcient.
Differences between the two approaches widen when estimating
survival limits for older adults (Figs.2 and 3), especially in hot and dry
conditions, due to age-related impairments in sweating that are rou-
tinely observed above the ages of ~60 –65 years 43,44.G i v e nt h a tw e
discount potential co-morbidities that may further hinder thermo-
regulation, the actual upper sweating and evaporative heat loss limits
may be even lower than estimated here.
Additional solar load (Fig. 2c, d) also decreases survivability,
which is not accounted for in the 35 °C T w model, chamber T w
threshold studies39, and many other common bioclimate indices. In a
survival scenario, most people would likely behaviorally adapt by
seeking the coolest available place, which would inevitably be
shaded45. There are plausible exceptions to this assumed capacity to
avoid extended sun exposure: those without access to shelter or those
unable to respond adequately due to health conditions impairing
decision-making and/or a lack of mobility. Leading risk factors for
heat-related mortality and morbidity in present-day heatwaves include
being unhoused or experiencing homelessness 46,47, physical
disability48, and mental health illnesses or behavioral disorders 49–51.
Nevertheless, the outputs for shaded conditions are the most rea-
sonable survivability comparison between our model and the 35 °C Tw
model (Fig. 2a, b). The extended heat index (based on the original
equations by Steadman’s apparent temperature approach52) also pre-
sents an alternative method to the Tw of 35 °C approach for assessing
heat stress53.
The 35 °C Tw survivability limit assumes heat stroke death after a
6-hour exposure 12. Depending on the resting metabolic rate and
assuming a normothermic resting T core of ~37 ˚C, after 6 hours of
Fig. 5 | Difference in liveability between older and younger adults for shaded or
sun-exposed conditions.The difference in liveability— or maximum safe metabolic
rate (Mmax )— between young and older adults in sun-exposed (a) and shaded/
indoor (b) conditions. The dotted area indicates air temperature and relative
humidity combinations that, with aging, shift the situation from liveable to only
survivable (i.e., people cannot increase their activity without continuously storing
heat inside the body, which will lead to a continuous in core temperature, but heat
stroke death after a 3-hour exposure would not occur). For example, in the shade, a
young adult can perform 1 METs more work that an older adult within the green-
shaded area. Note: TheΔMET values can also be seen by directly comparing Fig.4a,
b (for 5a) or Fig. 4c, d (for 5b). Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 7

Fig. 6 | Global maps of liveability estimates. a, d Differences in median safeMmax
(maximum safe metabolic rate) (ΔMET) between the present (2016–2026) and end-
of-century (2091–2100) for SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5, respectively (negative values
indicate less activity possible), with dotted areas indicating locations where median
difference is signiﬁcantly different (P <0 . 0 5 ) ,(b, e)M e d i a nMmax for current decade
(2016–2026) for SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5, respectively, where lower values (e.g., in
Bangladesh) indicate the most oppressive conditions and least ability to perform
activity, (c, f) the percentage of time for 2091–2100 decade with Tair >2 5° Cf o r
SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5, respectively. All analyses are based on warm conditions (Tair
>25 °C) for young adults. 3-hourly CMIP6 data are from GFDL ESM4 (~1° × 1.25°
atmosphere/land grid) following SSP2-4.5. Areas with no data indicate locations
that do not reach Tair > 25 °C in the given decade. Note: 1 MET corresponds to
complete rest. CMIP6 Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 6, GFDL
ESM4 Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory Earth Systems Model 4. SSP Shared
socioeconomic pathway. Made with Natural Earth - free vector and raster map data
at naturalearthdata.com. Source data are provided as a Source Dataﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 8

exposure to a T w of 35 °C, T core would reach ~48 –50 °C54.Y e t ,
heat stroke death is almost guaranteed after reaching a core tem-
perature of 43 °C29, which aligns more closely with the approximate
Tcore that would be reached after a 3-hour exposure if all remaining
assumptions of the 35 °C T w model are maintained. Therefore, the
translation from heat storage to T core between our physiology-based
approach and the 35 °C T w limit is not the primary driver of their
differences; if it were, the 3-hour shaded model (dotted blue line,
Fig. 2a) would overlap the 35 °C T w (thick solid black) line. Instead,
substantial differences persist, especially above Tair of ~45 °C. In fact,
no singular Tw threshold matches the non-linearity of the physiological
survival threshold because sweating restrictions cannot be captured
using a ﬁxed Tw approach.
Based on the T w 35 °C exceedance 34, recent studies identify
vulnerable areas around the Arabian Gulf 35, the North China Plain 55,
the Ganges and Indus River basins 16, and some coastal subtropical
locations. Our model indicates that heat health impacts are vastly
underestimated (particularly in dry regions and for older adults) if
applying the 35 °C T w threshold in current and future conditions. In
arid regions projected to reach Tair >5 3–55 °C, the survival of young,
healthy adults in conditions otherwise conducive to minimal heat
stress will be threatened. The prospect of survival for the elderly
following 6 hours of exposure to T air > 46.4 °C, irrespective of
humidity, is bleak. While reducing the exposure duration from 6 to
3 hours pushes these maximum temperatures to ~54.7 °C and 48.6 °C
for younger and older adults, respectively, survival limits will still be
reached at much lower Tw values than 35 °C. As a result, it is likely that
regions characterized by low future heat stress risk in survivability/
adaptability studies 12,15 (e.g., dry regions, areas with high elderly
populations) will experience unsurvivable heat extremes without
appropriate heat adaptation. Future work can leverage the advanced
modeling capabilities and projected global demographics changes to
illustrate likely future impacts using this model (see Table 3, Python
Module and SM).
Assuming that people are inactive (minimal basal heat generation)
is a common characteristic of any model assessing human survival in
extreme heat. However, for a region to be truly liveable (or habitable),
people must carry out essential activities, sometimes outdoors, even
during the hottest times of the day. Hence, our liveability approach
estimates human impacts beyond life or death, answering how people
can live and be active in extreme heat environments without increases
in Tcore. Daily tasks such as writing, desk work, and typing (1.8 METs),
general housework (3.3 METs), and gardening (4.4 METs) generate
more metabolic heat 56. The endogenous heat loads of occupational
tasks such as digging (5.0 METs), building roads (6.0 METs), and
bailing hay (7.8 METs) are even higher56, however, people can still do
these strenuous activities if they self-pace to avoid heat storage. Based
on our model, a sustained activity of ~4.5 –5.0 METs (e.g., dancing) is
safe for temperatures above 25 °C, yet more strenuous activity is
possible by lowering heat exposure, taking breaks, and/or self-
pacing57,58.
The application of our liveability model using climate projections
demonstrates that under a low-to-moderate emissions scenario (SSP2-
4.5), median reductions in Mmax will be modest (~0.25 METs), which
more than doubles to–0.64METs under the higher emissions scenario
SSP5-8.5. These changes could represent a slightly lowered
Fig. 7 | Histograms of safe activity in six global cities comparing young and
older adults as well as present and future climates.Maximum safe metabolic rate
(Mmax ) histograms for six selected locations (a) Roma, Italy; (b) Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia; (c) Cartagena, Colombia; (d) Kumasi, Ghana; (e) New Delhi, India; (f) Dakha,
Bangladesh using data from the present (2016–2026) and end-of-century
(2090–2100) for young adults (teal and red) and over 65 years old (gold and yel-
low). 3-hourly CMIP6 data from GFDL ESM4 following SSP2-4.5 (left column) and
SSP5-8.5 (right column) is used selecting the grid point closest to the city location.
Note: the Mmax range truncates around a minimum value of 1.5 METs as the lower
limit of activity intensity to survive but not live. Based on distinct moisture regimes,
the six locations were chosen within areas that will experience the top 5% Mmax
decline for young adults and overlap with the main cities in those regions. CMIP6:
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 6; GFDL ESM4: Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory Earth Systems Model 4. SSP: Shared socioeconomic pathway.
Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 9

productivity (e.g., fewer crops harvested, the need for extra workers)
or decreased activity performed, with economic or health
consequences57–59. While quantifying these consequences is beyond
the scope of the present paper, this should be the focus of future
research. Further, under SSP5-8.5, some places will transition from
liveable to only survivable, increasing from a frequency of <0.5% of the
time today to up to 7.8% by end-of-century (i.e., up to 6 months/dec-
ade, Supplementary Fig. S13) (these increases do not occur under
SSP2-4.5). The sensitivity of this result to emissions scenarios and other
aspects of climate change uncertainty should be explored in future
work. Given the most populated global regions60 (apart from Northern
Australia) are expected to have the greatestMmax declines, population
growth will continue to increase the number of people impacted
globally unless adaptive capacity increases61.
Most striking, however, is the clear and prominent (~1.3–2.9 METs)
reduction in Mmax with aging (Fig. 7). Older people inevitably become
less active as they age; however, Mmax values during warm conditions
in some cities, even during this decade, could constrain them to merely
essential low-intensity indoor tasks such as light housework, cleaning,
and washing dishes requiring only 2.0–2.5 METs.
Emerging empirical data from laboratory studies provide phy-
siological support of our model results for young, healthy adults in
shaded conditions. Wolf et al.62 deﬁne critical environmental limits as
the point at which participants enter uncompensability (which is how
we de ﬁne liveability) see also Table 1). The data reported by these
studies39,62 are given for Tair from 36 °C to 50.5 °C for resting subjects
(1.8 METs–ﬁlled circles Fig.4a) and are ~0.0–2.0 °C Tw higher than the
liveability limits predicted by our model, likely due to lower METs here
(1.5 METs). Relative to the critical T w limits for light physical activity
(3.2 METs–open circles Fig. 4a) reported by Wolf et al. 62,t h ev a l u e s
from our model underestimate Mmax by ~0.04 METs (for resting, our
model overestimatesMmax by merely 0.2 METs).
Our model results illustrate the importance of accounting for
speciﬁc subpopulation groups ’ attributes when projecting impacts
from extreme heat stress. The vulnerability of older adults to heat-
related illnesses is well-known63,64. Our survivability model identi ﬁes
conditions beyond which even the ﬁttest young adults, at best, will
perish over 3 or 6 hours without access to cooling resources. This work
further describes conditions that will inevitably have deadly heat
stroke consequences for the elderly— a critical part of every commu-
nity— while acknowledging that higher health impacts could result
when considering cardiovascular heat-related effects 1,65.M o r e o v e r ,
reductions in safe activity levels for young and older adults between
the present and future indicate a stronger effect from aging than from
warming over this century (Fig. 7).
Many of the most at-risk regions are also the most populated.
While infrastructure providing arti ﬁcially cooled environments may
serve as a solution in some settings66, required resources preclude this
option for many, especially in lower- and middle-income countries67.
Extreme heat may also increase the likelihood of displacement or
migration of people from non-survivable and non-liveable areas 33,
increasing risk for resource competition and human conﬂict68.F u t u r e
research is needed to identify regions where effective heat stress
adaptation measures should be prioritized and as warmer conditions
arise over the coming decades 69.T a b l e3 indicates future work and
methodological possibilities to address further research gaps and
shortcomings discussed in this study but not examined quantitively,
requiring signiﬁcant collaboration among disciplines70.
In summary, this paper establishes an advanced modeling
approach based on human physiology for assessing survivability and
Table 3 | Future collaborative work among various sub-topics and disciplines
Sub-topic or discipline Future work/next steps based on model capabilities
Thermal physiology Create a catalog of speci ﬁc estimates of skin wettedness, skin temperature, and maximum sweat rates across population types, ages,
medications intake, and health disorders/chronic diseases.
Model the impact of personal cooling strategies, such as dousing or misting skin, electric fans, and foot or hand immersion in water78,79.
Conduct a sensitivity analysis of windﬂow impacts within the liveability and survivability models, and activity velocity impacts for liveability.
Model changes to behavior based on thermal exposure (e.g., Vargas et al.80) and other physiological attributes that affect adaptive
behavior.
Characterize other measures of physiological heat strain, including cardiovascular and renal strain (not only heat stroke, as modeled here).
Test and model different clothing factors within the liveability and survivability models.
Empirically test maximum duration of intensity safe activities (Mmax) in different extreme environmental conditions and describe the
changes in skin temperature and sweat rate over time and across the lifespan (e.g., refs. 39,62,81) to allow for appropriate ranges and
scaling factors applied within both liveability and survivability models.
Improve the steady-state version of the model, as applied here, to account for changes within the 3–6 hour exposure in the variables
assumed as constant.
Conduct experiments across a range of plausible biophysical parameters for uncertainty estimation and subsequent model application
across different temperature/humidity combinations along the survivability and liveability threshold curves.
Climate sciences Run the present model using multiple GCMs and emissions scenarios to provide an ensemble of futures, addressing various sources of
uncertainty, including that from both the biophysical and climate models (e.g., Petkova et al.82).
Obtain regional or city-speciﬁc analysis of future heat stress with downscaled, bias-corrected climate projections.
Evaluate time-of-emergence for different survivability and livability thresholds using single (global climate) model initial-condition large
ensembles (SMILEs).
Assess the relative importance of human population trends (increase in the number of people, aging) versus climate change in future health
burdens from extreme heat.
Quantify the probability of exceptional heat wave and/or mass heat fatality events over different regions with different levels of climate
change.
Public health Determine the sources of differences between physiological models and epidemiological models to inform future model improvements.
Quantify compounding and cascading risks connected to heat and health, including heatwaves compounded by wildﬁres.
Evaluate the extent to which different urban designs would alter liveability or survivability.
Leverage the new modeling capabilities along with projected global demographics to better determine impact across a diverse population
for public health preparedness.
Future work to be accomplished and tests to run connected to our new physiological modeling approach to allow for numerous analysis types and answers tol a r g e rq u e s t i o n s .
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 10

liveability across subpopulations (younger and older female adults)
and diverse climates, suitable for application with global climate
model output. Among survivability assessments, we ﬁll speciﬁcg a p s
around these factors across the full spectrum of temperature and
humidity combinations, as compared to the common T w of 35 °C
threshold, and introduce a new method to determine liveability.
Results show a vast overestimation of human limits to survival
when using the 35 °C Tw survivability assumption, especially for older
adults and hot-dry regions. Compared to the 35 °C T w, differences in
physiological survival limits range from 0.9 °C T w lower (young
adults, humid conditions) to 13.1 °C T w lower (older adults, dry con-
ditions). By end-of-century, liveability declines are expected, mainly
in already-populated and heat-vulnerable regions. Reductions in safe,
sustained activity levels between present time and end-of-century in
young and old adults indicate a stronger impact from aging on heat-
health risk than from warming, thus the spatial extent and intensity of
intolerable heat stress in an aging population cannot be understated.
This work addresses fundamental shortcomings of common models
estimating future human habitability or survivability by taking a
physiological approach while opening avenues for more robust
analyses (Table 3). Results and the ﬂexible approach will advance
methods in global survivability and liveability analyses under
increasing heat stress. Findings underline the need for continued
research efforts and investments in heat risk management, adaptive
capacity, and technological innovation for personal heat protection
in vulnerable global regions.
Methods
Overview
Our approach leverages methods of partitional calorimetry to model
human heat balance 71 describing heat transfer between the human
body and surrounding environment for warm conditions. Models are
run across all plausible combinations of air temperature and moist-
ure levels (e.g., RH) for warm conditions. The baseline approach
builds on the general core principles of assumptions within Sher-
wood & Huber 12, with additional complex rational equations and
population-speciﬁc inputs. The complete model, including all equa-
tions and the fundamental physiology and biophysical details, are
outlined in the SM and available code. Below, we brie ﬂy explain how
the full model is applied to comprehensively predict heat stroke
death (survivability) and maximum safe sustained levels of physical
activity (liveability) (Fig. 1).
We evaluate environments across all plausible moisture levels for
warm Tair between 25–60 °C, holding windspeed constant at 1 m.s −1.
Assessments are completed for indoors (or shade), where mean radi-
ant temperature (T r)=T air, and outdoors (sun-exposed), where
Tr =T a + 15 °C, assuming partly sunny conditions averaged over eight
midday hours19. Finally, we assess healthy young (18 –40 years) and
older female adults (>65 years). Speciﬁcs and assumptions are listed in
Fig. 1 and the SM.
Survivability estimates
Survivability estimates are provided for 3 and 6-hour of constant
thermal exposure to align with current climate model outputs and past
studies. The model detects increases in T core from an initial value of
37.0 °C to ≥43.0 °C. The ΔTcore = 6.0 °C represents the upper limits of
heat stroke29 (however, we acknowledge that the severity of hyper-
thermia is variable, ranging from 41 to 47 °C 72). Thus, this model
assumes that a person cannot store more than 17.88 kJkg −1,t a k i n ga
typical human’s heat capacity (Cp) as 2.98 kJKg−1°C−1 73.
Therefore, the critical rate of heat storage (S) before inevitable
heat stroke death during rest is 0.82 WKg −1 for a 6-hour constant
exposure ( Ssurv6
), and 1.65 Wkg −1 for a 3-hour constant exposure
(Ssurv3
). Assuming a resting metabolic rate of 1.5 METs (1.8 Wkg−1), the
maximum permissible netHloss is 0.98 Wkg−1 for 6-hour and 0.15 Wkg−1
f o r3 - h o u re x p o s u r e s :
Hloss6 = ðHprod /C0 Ssurv6
Þ =1 :8 /C0 0:82ðÞ =0 :98 ðWkg/C0 1Þ ð1Þ
Hloss3 = Hprod /C0 Ssurv3
/C16/C17
=1 :8 /C0 1:65ðÞ =0 :15 ðWkg/C0 1Þð 2Þ
whereHloss is the net heat loss from the skin surface to the surrounding
environment and Hprod is internal metabolic heat production. Note
that Hloss is a function of weight and thus would vary across popula-
tions. Hprod is equivalent to metabolic rate (M) because W k =0 . A
person is also assumed nude for the survivability assessment (thus, dry
and evaporative heat transfer clothing resistances are 0 m 2°CW−1), in
line with assumptions made by other survivability models12.
Our approach models evaporative restrictions to heat loss, which
can exist due to three factors (see Supplementary Fig. S1): (1) high
environmental humidity (or biophysical evaporative heat loss limit
(Emaxenv
); (2) the physiological capacity to saturate the skin surface in
high humidity environments due to a limited maximum skin wetted-
ness (ωmax); and (3) by the maximum rate at which sweat can be pro-
duced (Smax). These are factored into both survivability and liveability
analyses.
For survivability, we follow the framework in Supplementary
Fig. S1 to determine whether a person can survive heat stroke based on
three questions, with a potential for four outcomes given individual
characteristics (e.g., differing age and size). Thus, the algorithm
determines survivability (as a dichotomous variable: yes/no) and
assigns outcomes based on combined environmental and physiologi-
cal restrictions. Based on this framework, a person will (see zones
in Fig. 2):
1. Survive while remaining within sweating limits.
2. Survive despite exceeding sweating limits.
3. Not survive because the environment restricts heat loss too much
( i nh i g hh u m i d i t y ) .
4. Not survive because the required sweat rate is not possible (in low
humidity).
5. Not survive due to both critical environmental heat loss restric-
tions (3rd argument) and a required sweat rate that is not possible
(4th argument).
Liveability estimates
Liveability is the maximum metabolic rate ( Mmax)t h a tc a nb eg e n e r -
ated before S ≥ 0, or sustained compensable heat stress, where
M= Hprod .T h e Mmax value indicates the sustained activity levels
(intensity but not duration) possible without unchecked rises in Tcore
(i.e., uncompensable heat stress74)w i t h i nag i v e ns t e a d y - s t a t et h e r m a l
environment. This deﬁnition assumes that people will self-pace their
maximum level of physical activity over a prolonged period to attain
S = 0, as well as constant sweating and skin temperature. Mmax is a
continuous variable (in Watts), which we convert to energy expendi-
ture in METs for a simpler interpretation. A clothing insulation value of
0.36 clo is used (light shorts and cotton T-shirt) for liveability. Full
details are in the SM.
Application of liveability model using climate models
To illustrate advanced model capabilities, we explore the distribution
of liveability in present and projected future conditions in regions
globally (as outlined above and in SM). The Coupled Model Inter-
comparison Project phase 6 (CMIP6) provides state-of-the-art GCMs
projections under various warming scenarios75. We utilize CMIP6 data
from GFDL ESM4 and MPI ESM1.2 (~1° × 1.25° atmosphere/land grid)
following SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5 (Shared Socioeconomic Pathway).
SSP2-4.5 represents a middle-of-the-road emissions scenario, which
may be likely considering existing net-zero commitments76,a n dS S P 5 -
8.5 represents a high emissions scenario. As inputs, we use 3-hourly
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 11

near-surface air temperature, speci ﬁc humidity, and surface atmo-
spheric pressure for two 10-year global snapshots — present
(2016–2025) and future (2091 –2100)— to construct global maps of
projected changes over land and detailMmax in select cities. A grid cell
was considered land if it contained >45% land cover; otherwise, ana-
lyses were not performed.
We used two-sided Mann-Whitney U tests to detect signi ﬁcant
projected changes in Mmax between present (2016–2025) and future
(2091–2100) decades. Here, we test differences in median Mmax (50th
percentile of distribution) using a signiﬁcance level ofp <0 . 0 5( F i g .6).
Six cities within the global top 5% of expected declines of Mmax were
selected to display deceased Mmax in statistical distributions (Fig. 7):
Roma, Italy (a); Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (b); Cartagena, Colombia (c);
Kumasi, Ghana (d); New Delhi, India (e); and Dakha, Bangladesh (f). The
Mann-Whitney U tests were used because Mmax is a continuous vari-
able, not always normally distributed. We evaluated liveability changes
solely for shaded warm/hot weather conditions (Tair >25 °C).
Our analyses focus on exploring uncertainties associated with the
physiological model; future work will complete a more comprehensive
climate change impact analysis using many GCM simulations to con-
sider uncertainties due to model structure, internal variability of the
climate system, and emissions scenario. GFDL ESM4 and MPI ESM1.2,
like any climate models, possess biases in their simulation of mean
climate and the diurnal cycle, and do not capture details of urban
landscapes77. Future impact assessments might consider bias correct-
ing and downscaling the GCM output prior to inputting in the phy-
siological model.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The model output data generated in this study are provided as source
data ﬁles. Input data included all plausible combinations of air tem-
perature and moisture levels for warm conditions, which we used for
generating survivability wet-bulb curves and liveability analyses;
therefore, the only external data comes from CMIP6 data. The input
data for the model for the personal pro ﬁles custom-built for this
application are provided in the methods, supplementary information,
and Zenodo repository. The CMIP6 data were downloaded from
https://esgf-node.llnl.gov/search/cmip6/. All the source data for ﬁg-
ures are provided in the Zenodo repository as well and with this paper
as a Source Dataﬁle, including the wet bulb temperature matrices from
the combinations of air temperature and humidity tested. Source data
are provided with this paper.
Code availability
The model code was developed using Python 3.10.9 and authors thank
the teams behind this open-source project, as well as NumPy (v1.23.5),
Matplotlib (v3.7), Xarray (v2022.11.0), Pandas (V 1.5.3), Cartopy (V
0.21.1), and MetPy (1.4.1) developers. Custom codes with the model
developed for this study and tutorials to reproduce survivability and
liveability temperature-humidity matrices are available via Zenodo
data repository (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10020136).
References
1. Kenney, W. L., Craighead, D. H. & Alexander, L. M. Heat waves,
aging, and human cardiovascular health.Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.46,
1891 (2014).
2. Ebi, K. L. et al. Hot weather and heat extremes: health risks. Lancet
398, 698–708 (2021).
3. Ravanelli, N. M., Hodder, S. G., Havenith, G. & Jay, O. Heart rate and
body temperature responses toextreme heat and humidity with
and without electric fans. JAMA 313,7 2 4–725 (2015).
4 . A v e l l i n i ,B .A . ,K a m o n ,E .&K r a j e w s k i ,J .T .P h y s i o l o g i c a lr e s p o n s e so f
physicallyﬁt men and women to acclimation to humid heat.J. Appl.
Physiol. 49, 254261 (1980).
5 . P u t n a m ,H .e ta l .I t’s not the heat, it’s the vulnerability: attribution of
the 2016 spike in heat-associated deaths in Maricopa County, Ari-
zona. Environ. Res. Lett. 13, 94022 (2018).
6 . V a n o s ,J . ,B a l d w i n ,J .W . ,J a y ,O .&E b i ,K .L .S i m p l i c i t yl a c k s
robustness when projecting heat-health outcomes in a changing
climate. Nat Commun 11, 6079 (2020).
7. Guo, Y. et al. Quantifying excess deaths related to heatwaves under
climate change scenarios: A multicountry time series modelling
study. PLoS Med. 15, e1002629 (2018).
8. Lüthi, S. et al. Rapid increase in the risk of heat-related mortality.
Nat. Commun. 14,4 8 9 4( 2 0 2 3 ) .
9. Rocklöv, J. & Ebi, K. L. High dose extrapolation in climate change
projections of heat-related mortality.J. Agric Biol. Environ. Stat. 17,
461–475 (2012).
10. Baldwin, J. et al. Humidity ’s role in heat-related health outcomes: a
heated debate. Environ. Health Perspect.131, 055001 (2023).
11. Lin, S. et al. Extreme high temperatures and hospital admissions for
respiratory and cardiovascular diseases.Epidemiology20,
738–746 (2009).
12. Sherwood, S. C. & Huber, M. An adaptability limit to climate change
due to heat stress. P r o c .N a t lA c a d .S c i .107, 9552–9555 (2010).
13. Moratiel, R., Soriano, B., Centeno, A., Spano, D. & Snyder, R. L. Wet-
bulb, dew point, and air temperature trends in Spain.Theor. Appl
Climatol. 130,4 1 9–434 (2017).
14. Raymond, C., Singh, D. & Horton, R. M. Spatiotemporal Patterns and
Synoptics of Extreme Wet-Bulb Temperature in the Contiguous
United States. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 122,1 3 , 1 0 8–113,124 (2017).
1 5 . C o f f e l ,E .D . ,H o r t o n ,R .M .&d eS h e r b i n i n ,A .T e m p e r a t u r ea n d
humidity based projections of a rapid rise in global heat stress
exposure during the 21st century.Environ. Res. Lett.13, 14001 (2017).
16. Im, E.-S., Pal, J. S. & Eltahir, E. A. B. Deadly heat waves projected in
the densely populated agricultural regions of South Asia.Sci. Adv.
3, e1603322 (2017).
17. Sa ﬁe d d i n e ,S . ,C l e r b a u x ,C . ,C l a r i s s e ,L . ,W h i t b u r n ,S .&E l t a h i r ,E .A .
B. Present and future land surface and wet bulb temperatures in the
Arabian Peninsula.Environ. Res. Lett. 17, 044029 (2022).
18. Dunne, J. P., Stouffer, R. J. & John, J. G. Reductions in labour
capacity from heat stress under climate warming.Nat. Clim. Chang
3,5 6 3( 2 0 1 3 ) .
19. Guzman-Echavarria, G., Middel, A. & Vanos, J. K. Beyond heat
exposure-new methods to quantify and link personal heat expo-
sure, stress, and strain in diverse populations and climates: The
journal Temperature Toolbox.Temperature10,3 5 8–378 (2023).
20. Semenza, J. C., McCullough, J. E., Flanders, W. D., McGeehin, M. A.
& Lumpkin, J. R. Excess hospital admissions during the July 1995
heat wave in Chicago. Am. J. Prev. Med 16,2 6 9–277 (1999).
21. Leon, L. R. & Bouchama, A. Heat stroke. Compr. Physiol. 5,
611–647 (2015).
2 2 . C h e s h i r e ,W .P .&F e a l e y ,R .D .D r u g - i n d u c e dh y p e r h i d r o s i sa n d
hypohidrosis.Drug Saf. 31,1 0 9–126 (2008).
23. Dervis, S. et al. A comparison of thermoregulatory responses to
exercise between mass-matched groups with large differences in
body fat. J. Appl Physiol. 120,6 1 5–623 (2016).
24. Ravanelli, N., Coombs, G. B., Imbeault, P. & Jay, O. Maximum skin
wettedness after aerobic training with and without heat acclima-
tion. Med Sci. Sports Exerc. 50, 299 (2018).
2 5 . D a a n e n ,H .A .M . ,R a c i n a i s ,S .&P é r i a r d ,J .D .H e a ta c c l i m a t i o nd e c a y
and re-induction: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Sports
Med. 48,1 –22 (2017).
2 6 . F l o u r i s ,A .D .&S c h l a d e r ,Z .J .H u m a nb e h a v i o r a lt h e r m o r e g u l a t i o n
during exercise in the heat. Scand. J. Med Sci. Sports 25,
52–64 (2015).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 12

2 7 . V a n o s ,J .K . ,W a r l a n d ,J .S . ,G i l l e s p i e ,T .J .&K e n n y ,N .A .I m p r o v e d
predictive ability of climate-human-behaviour interactions with
modiﬁcations to the COMFA outdoor energy budget model.Int. J.
Biometeorol.56,1 0 6 5–1074 (2012).
28. Vargas, N. T. et al. Increased skin wetness independently augments
cool-seeking behaviour during passive heat stress.J. Physiol. 598,
2775–2790 (2020).
29. Bouchama, A. et al. Classic and exertional heatstroke.Nat. Rev. Dis.
Prim. 8,1 –23 (2022).
30. Moseley, P. L., Gapen, C., Wallen, E. S., Walter, M. E. & Peterson, M.
W. Thermal stress induces epithelial permeability.Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 267,C 4 2 5–C434 (1994).
31. Lambert, G. P. Intestinal barrier dysfunction, endotoxemia, and
gastrointestinal symptoms: the‘canary in the coal mine’during
exercise-heat stress?Thermoregul. Hum. Perform.53,6 1–73 (2008).
32. Christidis, N., Mitchell, D. & Stott, P. A. Rapidly increasing likelihood
of exceeding 50 °C in parts of the Mediterranean and the Middle
East due to human inﬂuence. NPJ Clim. Atmos. Sci. 6, 45 (2023).
33. Horton, R. M., de Sherbinin, A., Wrathall, D. & Oppenheimer, M.
Assessing human habitability and migration.Science 372,
1279–1283 (2021).
34. Raymond, C., Matthews, T. & Horton, R. M. The emergence of heat
and humidity too severe for human tolerance.Sci. Adv. 6,
eaaw1838 (2023).
35. Pal, J. S. & Eltahir, E. A. B. Future temperature in southwest Asia
projected to exceed a threshold for human adaptability.Nat. Clim.
Chang 6,1 9 7–200 (2016).
36. Buzan, J. R. & Huber, M. Moist heat stress on a hotter earth. Annu
Rev. Earth Planet Sci. 48,6 2 3–655 (2020).
37. Huber, M. What happens if the world gets too hot for animals to
survive?Bull. Atomic Sci.https://thebulletin.org/2022/07/extreme-
heat-animals-livestock-wildlife/#:~:text=Hot%2C%20humid%
20conditions%20can%20lead,potentially%20threatening%
20economies%20and%20ecosystems(2022).
38. Vecellio, D., Kong, Q., Kenney, L. & Huber, M. Greatly enhanced risk
to humans as a consequence of empirically determined lower moist
heat stress tolerance.P r o c .N a t lA c a d .S c i .120, e2305427120
(2023).
39. Vecellio, D. J., Wolf, S. T., Co ttle, R. M. & Kenney, W. L. Evaluating
the 35 °C wet-bulb temperature adaptability threshold for young,
healthy subjects (PSU HEAT Project).J. Appl Physiol. 132,
340–345 (2021).
40. Torii, M. Maximal sweating rate in humans. J. Hum. Ergol. 24,
137–152 (1995).
41. International Standard Organization. ISO 7933:2004 - Ergonomics
of the thermal environment - analytical determination and inter-
pretation of heat stress using calculation of the predicted heat strain.
(ISO, 2004).
42. Inoue, Y., Nakao, M., Araki, T. & Murakami, H. Regional differences in
the sweating responses of older and younger men.J. Appl. Physiol.
71,2 4 5 3–2459 (1991).
43. Gagnon, D., Romero, S. A., Cramer, M. N., Jay, O. & Crandall, C. G.
Cardiac and thermal strain of elderly adults exposed to extreme
heat and humidity with and without electric fan use. JAMA 316,
989–991 (2016).
44. Smith, C. J., Alexander, L. M. & Kenney, W. L. Nonuniform, age-
related decrements in regional sweating and skin bloodﬂow. Am. J.
Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.305, R877–R885 (2013).
45. de Freitas, C. R. Weather and place-based human behavior:
recreational preferences and sensitivity. Int J. Biometeorol. 59,
55–63 (2015).
46. Schwarz, L. et al. Heat waves and emergency department visits
among the homeless, San Diego, 2012-2019.Am. J. Public Health
112,9 8–106 (2022).
47. Scott, R. et al. Without shelter, people die: disproportionate mor-
tality among King County’s homeless population, 2009–2019. J.
Soc. Distress Homelessness32, 223–233 (2022).
48. Ma, R. et al. Estimation of work-related injury and economic burden
attributable to heat stress in Guangzhou, China.Sci. Total Environ.
666,1 4 7–154 (2019).
49. Alana, H. et al. The effect of heat waves on mental health in a
temperate Australian City.Environ. Health Perspect.116,
1369–1375 (2008).
50. Schmeltz, M. T. & Gamble, J. L. Risk characterization of hospitali-
zations for mental illness and/or behavioral disorders with con-
current heat-related illness.PLoS One 12,e 0 1 8 6 5 0 9( 2 0 1 7 ) .
51. Bouchama, A. et al. Prognostic factors in heat wave–related deaths:
a meta-analysis.Arch. Intern. Med. 167,2 1 7 0–2176 (2007).
52. Steadman, R. G. The assessment of sultriness. Part I: a temperature-
humidity index based on human physiology and clothing science.J.
Appl. Meteorol. 18,8 6 1–873 (1979).
53. Lu, Y.-C. & Romps, D. M. Extending the Heat Index.J. Appl. Meteorol.
Climatol. 61,1 3 6 7–1383 (2022).
54. Kenny, G. P. & Jay, O. Thermometry, calorimetry, and mean body
temperature during heat stress.Compr. Physiol. 3,1 6 8 9–1719,
https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c130011(2013).
55. Kang, S. & Eltahir, E. A. B. North China Plain threatened by deadly
heatwaves due to climate change and irrigation.Nat. Commun. 9,
2894 (2018).
5 6 . A i n s w o r t h ,B .E .e ta l .2 0 1 1C o m p e n d i u mo fP h y s i c a lA c t i v i t i e s :a
second update of codes and MET values.Med Sci. Sports Exerc.43,
1575–1581 (2011).
57. Morris, N. B. et al. The HEAT-SHIELD project — perspectives from an
inter-sectoral approach to occupational heat stress.J. Sci. Med.
Sport 24,7 4 7–755 (2021).
5 8 . V a n o s ,J . ,M o y c e ,S . ,L e m k e ,B .&K j e l l s t r o m ,T .E x t r e m eh e a t
exposure and occupational health in a changing climate.Extreme
Events Clim. Change 147–166, https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781119413738.ch10(2021).
59. Foster, J. et al. An advanced empirical model for quantifying the
impact of heat and climate change on human physical work capa-
city. Int J. Biometeorol. 65,1 2 1 5–1229 (2021).
60. Center for International Earth Science Information Network - CIESIN
- Columbia University.Population Estimation Service, Version 3
(PES-v3) (NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center
(SEDAC), 2018).
6 1 . Å s t r ö m ,C . ,O u d i nÅ s t r ö m ,D . ,A n d e r s s o n ,C . ,L .E b i ,K .&F o r s b e r g ,B .
Vulnerability reduction needed to maintain current burdens of heat-
related mortality in a changing climate—magnitude and determi-
nants. Int J. Environ. Res Public Health 14, 741 (2017).
62. Wolf, S. T., Cottle, R. M., Vecel lio, D. J., Kenney, W. L. & Wolf, S. T.
Critical environmental limits for young, healthy adults (PSU HEAT).
J. Appl. Physiol. 132,3 2 7–333 (2022).
63. Barnett, A. G. Temperature and cardiovascular deaths in the US
elderly: changes over time.Epidemiology18,3 6 9–372 (2007).
64. Kenney, W. L. & Munce, T. A. Invited review: aging and human
temperature regulation.J. Appl. Physiol. 95,2 5 9 8–2603 (2003).
65. Liu, J. et al. Heat exposure and cardiovascular health outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.Lancet Planet Health 6,
e484–e495 (2022).
66. Jay, O. et al. Reducing the health impacts of extreme heat: from
personal cooling strategies to green cities.Lancet 398,
709–724 (2021).
67. Acevedo, S., Mrkaic, M., Pugacheva, E. & Topalova, P. The unequal
burden of rising temperatures: how can low-income countries
cope? IMF BLOG https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2017/09/
27/the-unequal-burden-of-rising-temperatures-how-can-low-
income-countries-cope(2017).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 13

68. Clarke, B., Otto, F., Stuart-Smith, R. & Harrington, L. Extreme
weather impacts of climate change: an attribution perspective.
Environ. Res. Clim. 1, 012001 (2022).
6 9 . C i s s é ,G .e ta l .H e a l t h ,w e l l b e ing, and the changing structure of
communities. In:Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assess-
ment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(eds. Pörtner, H.-O. et al.) (Cambridge University Press, 2022).
70. Kenney, W. L., Havenith, G. & Jay, O. Thermal physiology, more
relevant than ever before. J. Appl. Physiol. 133,6 7 6–678 (2022).
71. Cramer, M. N. & Jay, O. Partitional calorimetry. J. Appl. Physiol.126,
267–277 (2019).
72. Leon, L. R. & Helwig, B. G. Heat stroke: role of the systemic
inﬂammatory response.J. Appl. Physiol. 109,1 9 8 0–1988 (2010).
7 3 . X u ,X . ,R i o u x ,T .P .&C a s t e l l a n i ,M .P .T h es p e c iﬁc heat of the human
body is lower than previously believed: The Journal Temperature
toolbox. Temperature10,2 3 5–239 (2023).
74. Cramer, M. N. & Jay, O. Biophysical aspects of human thermo-
regulation during heat stress. Autonomic Neurosci. 196,
3–13 (2016).
75. Eyring, V. et al. Overview of the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) experimental design and organization.
Geosci. Model Dev. 9,1 9 3 7–1958 (2016).
76. Hausfather, Z. & Moore, F. C. Net-zero commitments could limit
warming to below 2 °C. Nature News Views 604,2 4 7–248 (2022).
77. Dunne, J. P. et al. The GFDL Earth System Model version 4.1 (GFDL ‐
ESM 4.1): overall coupled model description and simulation char-
acteristics.J. Adv. Model Earth Syst. 12, e2019MS002015 (2020).
78. Morris, N. B. et al. A preliminary study of the effect of dousing and
foot immersion on cardiovascular and thermal responses to
extreme heat. JAMA 322,1 4 1 1–1413 (2019).
79. Morris, N. B. et al. Sustainable solutions to mitigate occupational
heat strain–an umbrella review of physiological effects and global
health perspectives.Environ. Health 19,1 –24 (2020).
80. Vargas, N. T., Schlader, Z. J., Jay, O. & Hunter, A. Prioritize research
on human behaviour during extreme heat.Nat. Hum. Behav. 7,
473–474 (2023).
81. Stapleton, J. M. et al. Aging impairs heat loss, but when does it
matter? J. Appl Physiol. 118,2 9 9–309 (2014).
82. Petkova, E. P. et al. Heat-related mortality in a warming climate:
projections for 12 US cities. Int J. Environ. Res Public Health 11,
11371–11383 (2014).
Acknowledgements
GEG and JKV acknowledge funding from the National Science Founda-
tion (NSF) Award #CMMI-2045663. O.J. acknowledges funding from the
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Investigator
Grant (2021/GNT2009507). We acknowledge the World Climate
Research Programme, which, through its Working Group on Coupled
Modeling, coordinated and promoted CMIP6. We thank the climate
modeling groups for producing and making available their model out-
put, the Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF) for archiving the data and
providing access, and the multiple funding agencies who support
CMIP6 and ESGF. We are grateful to Jared Sexton for his help with
obtaining the CMIP6 data and Haley Staudmyer for testing the code and
Tw calculation troubleshooting. We thank Colin Raymond and Alex
Goodman for sharing improved Python code to calculate Tw. We would
also like the Noll Lab at Pennsylvania State University, particularly Larry
Kenney and Daniel Vecellio, for helpful discussions around heat stress
and evaporative heat loss. Finally, we are grateful to Ariane Middel at
ASU for providing GIS mapping expertise and direction for the MRT
modeling methods used in the current paper and Stevan Earl for helping
with data management good practices to publish the code.
Author contributions
All authors conceptualized the study. J.V. acquired funding and super-
vised the project. O.J., C.B., G.G.E., and J.V. performed model devel-
opment and advancements. Climate data were obtained by J.B. G.G.E.
developed the model code and performed data analyses with guidance
from J.V. and O.J. J.B. and K.L.E. led interpretations of climate projec-
tions. J.V. led manuscript development and writing; all authors helped
with interpretation, writing, and feedback. All authors approved theﬁnal
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Jennifer Vanos.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks the anon-
ymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:7653 14

