These are useful documents accessible to health professionals and decision makers, which provide recommendations for key air pollutants, based on global synthesis of scientific evidence. However, numerous recent studies have been published that analyse associations betweenpollutantsandoutcomesintheshort-term,andtheexactshape of the concentration–response functions (CRFs) is unknown or insufficientlydefinedformanypollutantsandoutcomes(Landriganetal., 2018). As new scientific evidence is generated, AQGs need to be periodically revised and, where necessary, updated. As a result of the vast amount of evidence published in recent years, especially on the lower and upper bounds of the air pollution exposure distribution, WHO has convened a Guideline Development Group to revise the last version of the guidelines published in 2006. Our systematic review was commissioned by the WHO in order to generateevidencetosupportthe newupdateof theAQGs,withtheaim of providing updated evidence-based numerical concentration levels (i.e. guidelines) and, where possible, an indication of the shape of the CRFs for a number of ambient air pollutants, for relevant averaging times (i.e. longand short-term exposure duration) and in relation to critical health outcomes. In particular, the objective of this systematic review andmeta-analysis was to synthetize the worldwide evidence on the effects of short-term exposure to PM (PM2.5 and PM10), NO2, and O3, on all-cause and/or cause-specific mortality, including cardiovascular, respiratory, and cerebrovascular mortality. We aimed to fill the gap in the knowledge in this field, as previous studies were focused on specificairpollutantsoroutcomes,publicationdatesvaried,orsearches were more restricted. Based on previous evidence, the exposure-outcome combinations that were analysed included PM, NO2, and O3 – allcause mortality, and PM – cardiovascular, respiratory and cerebrovascular mortality. SO2 was not included in this study, as this pollutant was specifically addressed in a different systematic review. This systematicreviewwasguidedbytherequirementsoutlinedintheWHO Handbook for Guideline Development, 2nd edition (WHO Handbook for Guideline Development – 2nd Edition, 2014). 2. Methods 2.1. Protocol, registration, and reporting standards The protocol for this study was registered with PROSPERO (http:// www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/) under registration number CRD42018087749, before the formal screening of search results (Supplementary File S.1). The reporting complied with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) standards(Moheretal.,2009),withslightadaptations,sincethesewere originally intended for health care intervention evaluation. The PRISMA checklist for this study can be seen in Table A.1 (Appendix). 2.2. Research question AsummaryofthePopulation,Exposure,Comparator,andOutcomes (PECO) question (Morgan et al., 2018) is presented below: P: Among human population, what is the effect of E:Short-termexposuretoambientairpollutants(PM 10,PM2.5,NO2, O3) versus C:Exposuretolowerlevelsofairpollution(differenceof10µg/m3) on O: All-cause, cardiovascular, respiratory, and cerebrovascular mortality. 2.3. Eligibility criteria Our study population consisted of general human population, including subgroups at risk, i.e. children, pregnant women, the elderly, and patients with particular conditions, of all ages, developed and developing areas, both urban and rural settings. We have not imposed geographical restrictions. We considered only short-term exposures, defined in the order of onehourto7days(Shahetal.,2013),toambientairPM 10,PM2.5,NO2, and O3, from anysource, expressed in aconcentration unit (e.g. µg/m3, ppb). Articles evaluating NOx were also included in the calculations, using a factor of 0.44 for the conversion from NOx to NO2 (Anderson et al., 2013). The exposure to the pollutant of interest had to be via inhalation through outdoor ambient air predominantly. For PM10 and PM2.5, daily (24-hour) averages were considered, while 8-hour or 24hour maximum concentrations were included together for O3. In the case of NO2, two separate analyses were performed, one for 24-hour average, and one for daily 1-hour maximum. The comparison was with the same population exposed to a lower level of air pollutants, considering a given difference in a standardized concentration (10 µg/m3). The outcomes were classified using the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), and encompassed all-cause natural mortality (ICD-10: A00 to R99), causespecific mortality including cardio (ICD-10: I01 to I59) and cerebrovascular(ICD-10:I60toI69),andrespiratorymortality(ICD-10:J00 to J99) (WHO|International Classification of Diseases (ICD) Information Sheet,” n.d.). We defined an exposure-outcome combination as a pair comprising one of the pollutants selected, and one of the outcomes. Based on previous evidence, the exposure-outcome combinations that were analysed included PM, NO2, and O3 – all-cause mortality, and PM – cardiovascular, respiratory, and cerebrovascular mortality. As for study designs, we included human epidemiological studies, i.e. ecological time-series (ETS), case-crossover (CCO), cohort, and panelstudies;systematicreviewsoftheabovestudieswereusedtoscan forreferences.Aglossaryofdefinitionsusedinthisstudycanbeseenin P. Orellano, et al. Environment International 142 (2020) 105876 2 Table A.2 (Appendix). Studies were excluded if they evaluated the exposure in occupational settings, or as a result of indoor exposure exclusively; qualitative studies, reviews, methodological papers, and nonhuman studies (i.e. in vivo, in vitro), were also excluded. These exclusions were made at the title-abstract screening stage. Other reasons for exclusions were in the case of studies with partial or complete geographical and temporal overlap verified duringmeta-analysis, in order to avoid double-counting participants (Shah et al., 2015). In case oftotalorpartialoverlappingdata,thearticleforinclusionwasselected according to the following criteria: 1) wider geographical distribution; 2) longer duration of the study period; 3) more recent publishing date. Whenmultiplereportsofthesamestudyweredetected,allarticleswere includedinafirststage,andpreviouslymentionedcriteriawereusedto prevent double-counting. After the selection of the more informative article, the rest of the articles were excluded from the analysis. Regardinglagtimes,whenmultiplelag-estimateswerereportedinpapers, the framework proposed by Atkinson et al. (Atkinson et al., 2014) was followed: if only one lag estimate for a given pollutant/outcome pair is reported, it was included in the analysis. If multiple lag-estimates were reported,theselectionalgorithmwas:1)themostfrequentlyusedlagin all selected studies (0 and 1 days in this systematic review); 2) single lags, but not cumulative/distributed lags. 2.4. Studies search and selection Studies were searched comprehensively in the following bibliographicdatabasesandcitationindexes:MedicalLiteratureAnalysisand Retrieval System Online (MEDLINE) via PubMed, and Scopus via Elsevier. Moreover, regional databases in English and other languages as Literatura Latinoamericana y del Caribe en Ciencias de la Salud (LILACS), Western Pacific Region Index Medicus (WPRIM), Index Medicus for South-East Asia Region (IMSEAR), Index Medicus for the Eastern Mediterranean Region (IMEMR), and African Index Medicus (AIM) were searched to retrieve additional articles and grey literature. WHO Regional Databases are open access resources that comprises journal indexes of locally produced information, especially some developing country health journals and other reports, and complement the internationally known bibliographic databases.