PM10 and PM2.5 were also positively associated with cardiovascular, respiratory, and cerebrovascular mortality. We found some degree of heterogeneity between studies in three exposure-outcomecombinations,andthisheterogeneitycouldnotbeexplainedaftersubgroupanalysis.RoBwas low or moderate in the majority of articles. The certainty of evidence was judged as high in 10 out of 11 combinations, and moderate in one combination. Conclusions: This study found evidence of a positive association between short-term exposure to PM10, PM2.5, NO2, and O3 and all-cause mortality, and between PM10 and PM2.5 and cardiovascular, respiratory and cerebrovascular mortality. These results were robust through several sensitivity analyses. In general, the level of evidence was high, meaning that we can be confident in the associations found in this study. 1. Introduction A high proportion of ambient air pollution is generated from combustion processes (Goldberg et al., 2003). Particularly for the most studied and widespread air pollutants, i.e. particles with aerodynamic diameters under 10 and 2.5 µm (PM10 and PM2.5), ozone (O3), sulphur https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.105876 Received 19 December 2019; Received in revised form 1 June 2020; Accepted 3 June 2020 ⁎ Corresponding author at: Colon 332, San Nicolas, Provincia de Buenos Aires, ZIP 2900, Argentina. E-mail address:porellano@frsn.utn.edu.ar (P. Orellano). Environment International 142 (2020) 105876 Available online 23 June 2020 0160-4120/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/). T dioxide (SO2), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and carbon monoxide (CO), air quality standards including safe thresholds have been established (Suh et al., 2000). Air pollution has a widely recognized impact on human health, and there is a broad body of evidence that relates the exposure to air pollution and a wide range of adverse effects (WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2013). Shortand long-term exposure to ambient air pollution contributes to disease burden through an increase in mortality risk, years of life lost, and years lived with disability (Ostro et al., 2018). According to the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) study estimates, around 4.2 million total deaths were directly attributable to particulate matter smaller than 2.5 µm (PM2.5) ambient air pollution in 2015 (Cohen et al., 2017). Evidence of the effects of the short-term exposure (from one hour to days) to air pollutants are conclusive for all-cause, respiratory, and cardiovascular mortality, and also for hospital admissions or emergency department visits (WHO|Air quality guidelines - globalupdate2005,”2018).Anumberofrecentsystematicreviewsand meta-analyses have demonstrated the effect of PM (Atkinson et al., 2015, 2014; Bell et al., 2013; Shah et al., 2015), NO2, NOx (Newell et al., 2018; Shah et al., 2013), and O3 (Bell et al., 2014) on all-cause and cause-specific mortality. In general, time-series studies have been useful to provide substantial information to derive ambient air quality guidelines and standards for acute exposure (Goldberg et al., 2003). In fact, this evidence is in consonance with the air quality guidelines (AQGs) published by the World Health Organization (WHO), a primary reference for air pollution standards worldwide (Landrigan et al., 2018). These are useful documents accessible to health professionals and decision makers, which provide recommendations for key air pollutants, based on global synthesis of scientific evidence. However, numerous recent studies have been published that analyse associations betweenpollutantsandoutcomesintheshort-term,andtheexactshape of the concentration–response functions (CRFs) is unknown or insufficientlydefinedformanypollutantsandoutcomes(Landriganetal., 2018). As new scientific evidence is generated, AQGs need to be periodically revised and, where necessary, updated. As a result of the vast amount of evidence published in recent years, especially on the lower and upper bounds of the air pollution exposure distribution, WHO has convened a Guideline Development Group to revise the last version of the guidelines published in 2006. Our systematic review was commissioned by the WHO in order to generateevidencetosupportthe newupdateof theAQGs,withtheaim of providing updated evidence-based numerical concentration levels (i.e. guidelines) and, where possible, an indication of the shape of the CRFs for a number of ambient air pollutants, for relevant averaging times (i.e. longand short-term exposure duration) and in relation to critical health outcomes. In particular, the objective of this systematic review andmeta-analysis was to synthetize the worldwide evidence on the effects of short-term exposure to PM (PM2.5 and PM10), NO2, and O3, on all-cause and/or cause-specific mortality, including cardiovascular, respiratory, and cerebrovascular mortality. We aimed to fill the gap in the knowledge in this field, as previous studies were focused on specificairpollutantsoroutcomes,publicationdatesvaried,orsearches were more restricted. Based on previous evidence, the exposure-outcome combinations that were analysed included PM, NO2, and O3 – allcause mortality, and PM – cardiovascular, respiratory and cerebrovascular mortality. SO2 was not included in this study, as this pollutant was specifically addressed in a different systematic review. This systematicreviewwasguidedbytherequirementsoutlinedintheWHO Handbook for Guideline Development, 2nd edition (WHO Handbook for Guideline Development – 2nd Edition, 2014). 2. Methods 2.1. Protocol, registration, and reporting standards The protocol for this study was registered with PROSPERO (http:// www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/) under registration number CRD42018087749, before the formal screening of search results (Supplementary File S.1). The reporting complied with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) standards(Moheretal.,2009),withslightadaptations,sincethesewere originally intended for health care intervention evaluation. The PRISMA checklist for this study can be seen in Table A.1 (Appendix). 2.2. Research question AsummaryofthePopulation,Exposure,Comparator,andOutcomes (PECO) question (Morgan et al., 2018) is presented below: P: Among human population, what is the effect of E:Short-termexposuretoambientairpollutants(PM 10,PM2.5,NO2, O3) versus C:Exposuretolowerlevelsofairpollution(differenceof10µg/m3) on O: All-cause, cardiovascular, respiratory, and cerebrovascular mortality. 2.3. Eligibility criteria Our study population consisted of general human population, including subgroups at risk, i.e. children, pregnant women, the elderly, and patients with particular conditions, of all ages, developed and developing areas, both urban and rural settings. We have not imposed geographical restrictions. We considered only short-term exposures, defined in the order of onehourto7days(Shahetal.,2013),toambientairPM 10,PM2.5,NO2, and O3, from anysource, expressed in aconcentration unit (e.g. µg/m3, ppb). Articles evaluating NOx were also included in the calculations, using a factor of 0.44 for the conversion from NOx to NO2 (Anderson et al., 2013). The exposure to the pollutant of interest had to be via inhalation through outdoor ambient air predominantly. For PM10 and PM2.5, daily (24-hour) averages were considered, while 8-hour or 24hour maximum concentrations were included together for O3. In the case of NO2, two separate analyses were performed, one for 24-hour average, and one for daily 1-hour maximum. The comparison was with the same population exposed to a lower level of air pollutants, considering a given difference in a standardized concentration (10 µg/m3). The outcomes were classified using the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD), and encompassed all-cause natural mortality (ICD-10: A00 to R99), causespecific mortality including cardio (ICD-10: I01 to I59) and cerebrovascular(ICD-10:I60toI69),andrespiratorymortality(ICD-10:J00 to J99) (WHO|International Classification of Diseases (ICD) Information Sheet,” n.d.). We defined an exposure-outcome combination as a pair comprising one of the pollutants selected, and one of the outcomes. Based on previous evidence, the exposure-outcome combinations that were analysed included PM, NO2, and O3 – all-cause mortality, and PM – cardiovascular, respiratory, and cerebrovascular mortality. As for study designs, we included human epidemiological studies, i.e. ecological time-series (ETS), case-crossover (CCO), cohort, and panelstudies;systematicreviewsoftheabovestudieswereusedtoscan forreferences.Aglossaryofdefinitionsusedinthisstudycanbeseenin P. Orellano, et al. Environment International 142 (2020) 105876 2 Table A.2 (Appendix). Studies were excluded if they evaluated the exposure in occupational settings, or as a result of indoor exposure exclusively; qualitative studies, reviews, methodological papers, and nonhuman studies (i.e. in vivo, in vitro), were also excluded. These exclusions were made at the title-abstract screening stage. Other reasons for exclusions were in the case of studies with partial or complete geographical and temporal overlap verified duringmeta-analysis, in order to avoid double-counting participants (Shah et al., 2015). In case oftotalorpartialoverlappingdata,thearticleforinclusionwasselected according to the following criteria: 1) wider geographical distribution; 2) longer duration of the study period; 3) more recent publishing date. Whenmultiplereportsofthesamestudyweredetected,allarticleswere includedinafirststage,andpreviouslymentionedcriteriawereusedto prevent double-counting. After the selection of the more informative article, the rest of the articles were excluded from the analysis. Regardinglagtimes,whenmultiplelag-estimateswerereportedinpapers, the framework proposed by Atkinson et al. (Atkinson et al., 2014) was followed: if only one lag estimate for a given pollutant/outcome pair is reported, it was included in the analysis. If multiple lag-estimates were reported,theselectionalgorithmwas:1)themostfrequentlyusedlagin all selected studies (0 and 1 days in this systematic review); 2) single lags, but not cumulative/distributed lags. 2.4. Studies search and selection Studies were searched comprehensively in the following bibliographicdatabasesandcitationindexes:MedicalLiteratureAnalysisand Retrieval System Online (MEDLINE) via PubMed, and Scopus via Elsevier. Moreover, regional databases in English and other languages as Literatura Latinoamericana y del Caribe en Ciencias de la Salud (LILACS), Western Pacific Region Index Medicus (WPRIM), Index Medicus for South-East Asia Region (IMSEAR), Index Medicus for the Eastern Mediterranean Region (IMEMR), and African Index Medicus (AIM) were searched to retrieve additional articles and grey literature.