Besides, equivalents of “air pol - lution” and equivalents of “COPD” were each combined with the odds ratio (OR), and then, the two keywords and time tag were combined (with “ AND”). By using specific tags for each electronic database, a search strategy was developed for each one. The search was conducted in PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar databases from January 1, 2010 to May 1, 2022. Studies extracted from the databases were entered into EndNote X8. To avoid missing any studies, a manual search was also carried out. Selection of studies Two reviewers identified eligible studies based on the abstracts and titles. The inclusion criteria were as fol - lows: (1) original studies (not meta-analyses or reviews) investigating the relationship between PM2.5 and COPD; (2) studies investigating the relationship between the two main variables quantitatively by measuring the effect size (OR/relative risk [RR]/hazard ratio [HR]/excess relative risk [EER], percentage change/percentage increase/rate ratio, and 95% CIs); (3) time-series and case-crossover designs; and (4) studies investigating the effects of PM2.5 caused by outdoor air pollution on COPD (5) studies measuring the minimum effect size at log0 or log01; (6) studies only examining PM2.5 concentration per 10 mg/ m3. The exclusion criteria were also quite specific: (1) stud - ies evaluating the effects of PM2.5 exposure due to indoor biomass burning, tobacco smoking, solid fuel use, and household air pollution on COPD; (2) previous diagno - sis of COPD; (3) not belonging to a specific group, such as children, women, or men; (4) no history of certain dis - eases, such as pneumonia, asthma, or shortness of breath in patients; (5) no history of occupational exposure (e.g., agricultural exposure); (6) death due to COPD; (7) stud - ies not investigating the relationship between the two main variables by measuring the effect size (OR/RR/ HR/EER, percentage change/percentage increase/rate ratio, and 95% CIs); (8) studies investigating the effects of acute exacerbation of COPD (AECOPD); and (9) animal studies. Two investigators independently extracted data from the selected articles using a data extraction form, the results of which were then compared; agreement was reached through consensus. The following data, if avail - able, were extracted from the included studies: study title, authors, year of publication, design, total period of assessment, confounders, pollutant models, pollution Page 3 of 9 Delavar et al. BMC Public Health (2023) 23:2229 exposure, level of pollution exposure, lag days, age of the population, sex of the population, population size, hos - pitalization due to COPD, COPD OR, min 95% CI for COPD, max 95% CI for COPD, COPD RR, min CI for COPD, max CI for COPD. Quality assessment was performed according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) and Meta-analysis of Obser - vational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) items. Moreover, publication bias was assessed using Begg’s and Egger’s tests. Besides, I2 statistic, a quantitative measure of inconsistency, was computed to appraise the statistical heterogeneity across studies. The characteris - tics of included studies are presented in tables and nar - rative forms, according to the PRISMA statement. Also, random-effects models were used for the meta-analysis when heterogeneity occurred across studies. Cochran’s Q test and I2 index were calculated for the assessment of heterogeneity and its extent. Besides, the effect of qual - ity score on the key variables was evaluated, and accord - ing to the I2 values, data were evaluated in the subgroup analysis or meta-analysis, as appropriate. Additionally, the trim-and-fill method was applied to correct any pub - lication bias, and the sensitivity of review findings was determined using restriction techniques (e.g., quality restriction and design restriction). The subgroup analysis was conducted for age, high quality score group, and lag days of 0–7 in the lag expo - sure group (separately or combined) if sufficient data were available. Comprehensive Meta-Analysis Soft - ware (CMA) Version 3 was used to measure the pooled effect size. In the literature, the generic inverse variance method has been recommended to synthesize data in non-randomized studies [19, 22]. If any of the studies provided the effect size estimates of the subgroups, the pooled effect size was calculated across the subgroups: this process can be interpreted as a meta-analysis at the level of individual studies [19, 22]. Most studies investi - gated the acute effects within two days after air quality changes; therefore, the average value was determined with lag days of 0–2. Additionally, CMA Version 3 pro - vided estimates of heterogeneity. Chi-square test was used to evaluate the heterogeneity, and a P-value < 0.05 was defined to represent significant heterogeneity. Moreover, a random-effects model was used when there was significant heterogeneity, while a fixed-effects model was plotted when there was non-significant het - erogeneity [20, 23]. Besides, publication bias between studies was assessed using funnel plots. The OR was calculated as a common measure of effect size. The RR effect size statistic was converted to OR, according to a study by Zhang and Yu [21, 24]. The following formula was used to calculate OR: where P0 is the incidence rate of the desired out - come in the non-exposed group. The pooled estimates were defined as significant at a P-value less than 0.05 (two-sided). Results Figure 1 shows 9,466 studies, which were extracted by searching PubMed (n = 1475), Scopus (n = 6250), and Web of science (n = 1741), as well as 52 studies extracted by searching other sources. However, 1495 studies were removed after eliminating duplicates. From the remain - ing 8027 studies, 7471 studies were excluded by reading the title and abstract, then the full text of 556 studies was read, and those that did not meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria were removed, and finally 15 studies remained. 15 original studies, including 10 time-series analyses and five case-crossover studies, were selected, which met all the inclusion criteria of this review. It should be noted that the findings of a time-series analy - sis from two different countries were considered as two separate studies. Also, the results of a case-crossover study from four regions of Australia were considered as four separate studies. Table 1 presents the baseline infor - mation reported in 19 studies from January 1, 2010 until May 1, 2022. In this study, random-effects models were plotted to determine the pooled effect size by calculating OR (χ2 = 349.95; df = 18; I2 = 94.86%; P < 0.001; Z = 2.68; P = 0.007). The random pooled effect size (OR) for the relationship between COPD hospitalization and PM2.5 was 1.016 (95% CI: 1.004–1.029). A 10-mg/m 3 daily increase in PM2.5 was associated with a 1.6% increase (95% CI: 0.4–2.9%) in COPD hospitalization (Fig. 1). Table 2 presents the subgroup analysis of the relation - ship between PM2.5 and COPD hospitalization. All stud - ies showed significant associations between these two variables (P < 0.05). The subgroup analyses by age, total period of assessment (short and long), and study loca - tion (Asian and non-Asian countries) did not reduce the heterogeneity across studies. However, several charac - teristics of these studies, including their design, season of analysis, lag days, and adjustments for humidity and temperature, contributed to heterogeneity across eligible studies in this meta-analysis. In various study designs, time-series analyses reported a 5% higher risk of short-term exposure due to COPD hospitalization; the heterogeneity was non-significant. Also, regarding different seasons (cold and warm), the pooled risk was 1.033 in the cold season and 1.037 in the warm season due to higher PM2.5 exposure; the heterogeneity between studies was non-significant. Adjustments OR = RR/HR ([1− P0]+[P0× OR ]) Page 4 of 9Delavar et al. BMC Public Health (2023) 23:2229 for confounding variables, except humidity and tem - perature, resulted in a 12% increase in the risk of COPD hospitalization due to short-term exposure; the hetero - geneity between studies was non-significant. Also, with respect to different lag days, the pooled risk was 6% in two lag days, 5% in three lag days, 9% in 0–1 lag days, 8% in 0–2 lag days, and 10% in 0–3 lag days due to higher PM2.5 exposure; the heterogeneity between studies was non-significant. The publication bias was evaluated in all eligible stud - ies using funnel plots for COPD hospitalization. A funnel plot of all the studies did not indicate significant publica - tion bias; almost all study plots focused on the effect size estimate line (Fig. 2). The results of Egger’s test showed no publication bias regarding the relationship between COPD hospitalization and PM2.5 (bias = 1.508; 95% CI: -1.475, 4.491; t = 1.066; P = 0.301). The trim-and-fill method was also used for missing studies. There were no missing studies on the right side of the mean effect. Nevertheless, according to the trim-and-fill method, six studies were missing on the left side of the mean effect. The adjusted effect size was highly similar to the original effect size (OR = 1.006; 95% CI: 0.993, 1.018; P < 0.001). Discussion Exposure to air pollutants has become an important public health concern in the last decade due to its negative impact on people’s emotional state, physical health, mental health, and ultimately well-being. Therefore, attention to air quality standards, set by the World Health Organi - zation (WHO), can significantly reduce mortality due to air pollution. The first step to develop systemic solutions for eliminating or at least reducing the risks is to conduct systematic studies and meta-analyses [10, 11]. In this meta-analysis of 19 studies, the association between PM2.5 and the risk of COPD hospitalization Fig. 1 Flow diagram of included/excluded studies Page 5 of 9 Delavar et al.