Experimental results show that RALs generally outperform standard LLMs on most biomedical tasks, but still struggle with robustness and selfawareness, particularly under counterfactual and diverse scenarios. Our proposed methods significantly improve performance in robustness to unlabeled and counterfactual data, and increase the model’s ability to detect and avoid incorrect predictions. These findings highlight key limitations in current RALs and underscore the need for continued refinement to ensure reliability and accuracy in highstakes biomedical applications. INTRODUCTION Recently, substantial progress has been made in large language models (LLMs). To adapt the LLM to the biomedical domain, several biomedical focused LLMs have been developed, such as MedLLaMA13B (1) and MedPaLM 2 (2). Despite demonstrating impressive general capabilities (3), these models still face substantial challenges, including factual hallucination (4) and absence of newly uploaded knowledge (5). Retrievalaugmented language models (RALs) (3 , 6–8), in contrast, can retrieve knowledge from an external datastore when needed, potentially reducing hallucination and improving the new knowledge adaption ability. The most common method is to use the designed retriever to retrieve the knowledge that is relevant to the input sentence; subsequently, the retrieved knowledge, along with the input sentence, is fed into the LLM to assist in generating the expected output. In the question answering (QA) task, a RAL can access knowledge from an unlabeled corpus, which serves as a retrievable knowledge base, such as PubMed. The QA format allows the unlabeled corpus to potentially furnish answers to questions. However, for tasks like triple extraction, incorporating the unlabeled corpus may yield adverse effects. Counterfactual information, such as er - ror annotations, is prevalent in labeled corpora, presenting challenges for retrievers in obtaining useful information. In addition, LLMs still grapple with generating unreliable information retrieved incorrectly. Incorporating diverse knowledge holds promise for improving model performance. For example, QA relies on extracting information from extensive contexts, thus potentially affecting information extraction performance. Moreover, the influence of retrieval information from various tasks or datasets on RAL performance remains underexplored. Selfawareness is crucial for RALs; if RALs can distinguish between positive retrieval knowledge and negative knowledge, they have the opportunity to rectify their actions. These challenges hinder RALs from consistently producing reliable and accurate responses. Unfortunately, in the biomedical domain, only a few studies, such as Almanac (9), have explored the RAL performance in QA, leaving a gap in understanding how these factors affect RAL across various biomedical natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Consequently, there is a pressing need for a comprehensive evaluation of RALs with different LLMs across biomedical NLP tasks. To this end, this paper conducts a comprehensive evaluation of RAL for different LLMs on five biomedical NLP tasks over 11 datasets. Specifically, we create a new RAL benchmark for biomedical NLP , namely, Biomedical RetrievalAugmented Generation Benchmark (BioRAB), as shown in Fig. 1, and create four testbeds to evaluate the mentioned fundamental abilities. 1. Unlabeled robustness denotes the ability of RALs to extract valuable information from unlabeled retrieval corpus, especially on labelintensive tasks, such as triple extraction and classification. For instance, in tasks like relation extraction, the corpus could be a labeled dataset (such as the training dataset) or unlabeled (training dataset without labels). If the RAL achieves comparable or superior performance by retrieving the unlabeled dataset compared to retrieving the labeled dataset, it indicates that labeled databases may not be necessary for RALs. In the testbed of the unlabeled robustness, the corpus contains instances without labels. 2. Counterfactual robustness denotes whether the RAL could retrieve the right information from the counterfactual corpus; in our work, the counterfactual instance refers to the mislabeled annotation. In the testbed of counterfactual robustness, the corpus consists of instances with a certain proportion of incorrect labels. 3. Diverse robustness evaluates whether RALs can achieve better performance by integrating information from multiple tasks. For instance, the corpus for the classification task is sourced from relation extraction and QA tasks. In the testbed of diverse robustness, the corpus comprises instances from various tasks. 1division of computational health Sciences, d epartment of Surgery University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. 2department of electrical and c omputer engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. 3institute for health i nformatics University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. *corresponding author. email: ruizhang@ umn. edu copyright © 2025 the Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. distributed under a creative commons Attribution License 4.0 (cc BY). Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 2 of 12 4. Negative awareness refers to the RAL ’s ability to discern whether retrieved knowledge positively or negatively affects the final output. In the testbed of negative awareness, the corpus comprises instances that are 100% counterfactual instances. Using BioRAB, we evaluate its performance across five tasks (triple extraction, link prediction, text classification, QA, and natural language inference) using 11 biomedical NLP datasets. Further - more, BioRAB undergoes evaluation with five widely used LLMs: LLaMA213B (10), MedLLaMA13B (1 ), LLaMA38B (11), Phi4 14B (12), and Qwen2.5 32B (13), using three commonly used retrievers [BM25 (14), Contriever (15), and MedCPT (16)]. We observed that although RALs can enhance response accuracy in the majority of biomedical NLP tasks we evaluated, they encounter notable challenges. Particularly in the QA task, we noted that RALs did not yield significant improvements in the datasets we used. We speculate that this could be attributed to the limitations of the corpus used for retrieving, as the training dataset (corpus we used for retrieving) may not have provided sufficient information compared to using Wikipedia or PubMed. Moreover, RALs struggle to generate the desired output when the corpus lacks labeling when compared to the labeled corpus. An interesting finding is that in datasets like ChemProt and Hetionet, RALs exhibit improved performance with unlabeled corpora compared to the source LLM. Besides, RALs lack the capability to extract useful information from counterfactual corpora and struggle to discern the most relevant information. We also find that this is not a common case; some datasets, such as in the dataset ADE and Hetionet, RAL could handle the counterfactual instance. In addition, when presented with a diverse labeled corpus, RALs do not achieve optimal performance across tasks, except for the natural language inference task. Last, we found that despite providing counterfactual examples during training, the LLM was still able to generate correct outputs in some instances. However, RALs struggle with selfawareness, as they lack the ability to determine which examples could help improve model performance. To address these challenges, we propose a detectand- correct method aimed at enhancing RAL ’s ability to identify and rectify errors in the retrieved corpus, thereby improving its overall reliability. In addition, we introduce a contrastive learning approach that refines RAL ’s negative awareness by strengthening its capacity to distinguish differences of samples. By integrating these two techniques, our method significantly enhances RAL ’s robustness and awareness ability, making it more effective in processing complex retrieval tasks. Together, these improvements contribute to a more resilient and accurate model for biomedical applications. Our contributions are the following: 1. We propose four abilities essential for evaluating RALs in the biomedical domain and introduce a benchmark called BioRAB to assess these capabilities. To our knowledge, this is the first benchmark tailored specifically to evaluate these four abilities for RALs in the biomedical domain. 2. We propose a detectand- correct method and a contrastive learning approach to enhance the RAL ’s robustness (unlabeled and counterfactual) and negative awareness. 3. We evaluated the LLM using the retrievalaugmented method and identified limitations in four key abilities. 4.