Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 1 of 12 HEAL TH AND MEDICINE Benchmarking retrievalaugmented large language models in biomedical NLP: Application, robustness, and selfawareness Mingchen Li1, Zaifu Zhan2, Han Yang3, Y ongkang Xiao3, Huixue Zhou3, Jiatan Huang1, Rui Zhang1* To reduce hallucinations in large language models (LLMs), retrievalaugmented LLMs (RALs) retrieve supporting knowledge from external databases. However, their performance on biomedical natural language processing (NLP) tasks remains underexplored. We introduce Biomedical RetrievalAugmented Generation Benchmark, a comprehensive evaluation framework assessing RALs across five biomedical NLP tasks and 11 datasets, using four testbeds: unlabeled robustness, counterfactual robustness, diverse robustness, and selfawareness. To improve RALs’ robustness and negative awareness, we propose a detectand- correct strategy and a contrastive learning approach. Experimental results show that RALs generally outperform standard LLMs on most biomedical tasks, but still struggle with robustness and selfawareness, particularly under counterfactual and diverse scenarios. Our proposed methods significantly improve performance in robustness to unlabeled and counterfactual data, and increase the model’s ability to detect and avoid incorrect predictions. These findings highlight key limitations in current RALs and underscore the need for continued refinement to ensure reliability and accuracy in highstakes biomedical applications. INTRODUCTION Recently, substantial progress has been made in large language models (LLMs). To adapt the LLM to the biomedical domain, several biomedical focused LLMs have been developed, such as MedLLaMA13B (1) and MedPaLM 2 (2). Despite demonstrating impressive general capabilities (3), these models still face substantial challenges, including factual hallucination (4) and absence of newly uploaded knowledge (5). Retrievalaugmented language models (RALs) (3 , 6–8), in contrast, can retrieve knowledge from an external datastore when needed, potentially reducing hallucination and improving the new knowledge adaption ability. The most common method is to use the designed retriever to retrieve the knowledge that is relevant to the input sentence; subsequently, the retrieved knowledge, along with the input sentence, is fed into the LLM to assist in generating the expected output. In the question answering (QA) task, a RAL can access knowledge from an unlabeled corpus, which serves as a retrievable knowledge base, such as PubMed. The QA format allows the unlabeled corpus to potentially furnish answers to questions. However, for tasks like triple extraction, incorporating the unlabeled corpus may yield adverse effects. Counterfactual information, such as er - ror annotations, is prevalent in labeled corpora, presenting challenges for retrievers in obtaining useful information. In addition, LLMs still grapple with generating unreliable information retrieved incorrectly. Incorporating diverse knowledge holds promise for improving model performance. For example, QA relies on extracting information from extensive contexts, thus potentially affecting information extraction performance. Moreover, the influence of retrieval information from various tasks or datasets on RAL performance remains underexplored. Selfawareness is crucial for RALs; if RALs can distinguish between positive retrieval knowledge and negative knowledge, they have the opportunity to rectify their actions. These challenges hinder RALs from consistently producing reliable and accurate responses.