Data statistics for the datasets we used in this work. Dataset Train Test Dev triple extraction Ade (21) 4970 2130 – chemProt (22) 4001 3355 2366 Git (23) 3734 465 492 Link prediction PharmKG (24) 4000 500 500 hetionet (25) 4000 500 500 Sdoh 3964 464 – text classification Adecorpus- v2 (21) 4000 500 500 Semdclass (26) 2400 600 600 dS 2127 237 – Question answering MedMcQA (27) 34,994 4183 4183 Natural language inference BioNLi (28) 5544 6308 12,807 Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 9 of 12 notes, categorized into 20 broad SDoH categories, covering various social factors that influence health outcomes. These categories include employment status, work conditions, access to food, housing status, income status, health literacy, insurance status, access to transportation, maltreatment history, environmental conditions, housing quality, neighborhood security, crime/incarceration history, social discrimination, social isolation, social support, immigrant status, substance abuse, physical activity, and sleep quality. QA and natural language inference In this paper, we used MedMCQA as the foundational dataset in the QA task and used BioNLI as the dataset of natural language inference. 1. MedMCQA is a multiplechoice QA dataset that is designed to address the medical entrance exam questions. In this work, we opt for the fivechoice version (A, B, C, D, and E). 2. BioNLI aims to understand whether the provided hypothesis is consistent or adversarial to the premise. Biomedical RetrievalAugmented Generation Benchmark In this part, we begin by outlining the operational flow of the RALs. Following this, we introduce the proposed four abilities and the building progress of four relevant testbeds. Last, we introduce the evaluation metrics used to assess performance. RAL working flow To solve the hallucination problem, RAL is proposed to retrieve the external knowledge from the corpus and improve the LLM perfor - mance. Generally, as shown in Fig. 2A, retrieved corpus needs to be constructed initially; in numerous QA RAL models, the corpus primarily originates from the unlabeled open source such as PubMed and Textbook. However, for some labelsensitive tasks, such as triple extraction, the unlabeled open source may be invalid. In our work, the corpus is defined as the training set for the relevant task. For instance, as illustrated in Fig. 2A, if “n” denotes the PHarmKG, each key corresponds to a sentence “what is the relationship between the head entity and tail entity?” in its training set, while the corresponding value denotes the relevant label relationship for that key. In the second step, the retriever is used to obtain the relevant (key, value) pairs from the corpus based on the input sentence. Last, the retrieved (key, value) pairs with the input sentence are fed into the LLM to generate the expected output. For each instance X of each n, there are three components: Instruction I, context C, and response R. For example, in the training dataset of Adecorpus- v2 (classification task), if the label of the sentence S: “She had been administered tacrolimus for prophylaxis of graftversus- host reaction” is False in the X, I = “Y ou are an excellent linguist. The task is to predict whether this sentence is True or False. Examples: context: The hemangioma regressed markedly 6 weeks after the procedure and serous retinal detachment showed marked resolution response: False, ” C = S, R = False. Four abilities of BioRAL Despite the fact that RAL has achieved considerable success in solving the hallucination problem, in the biomedical domain, the ability of RAL is underexplored. First, not all tasks have vast labeled cor - pora. While many research endeavors use the training set as the corpus, they still encounter limitations when contrasted with larger corpora. If a RAL can achieve similar performance to the RAL that uses labeled corpus, it would demonstrate the former’s ability to operate effectively without relying on labeled data. For another, the RAL may easily be misled by incorrectly labeled information (as shown in Fig. 2C). Furthermore, RALs may have the capability to obtain useful information from labeled corpora of other tasks (as shown in Fig. 2D). However, retrieving knowledge from labeled corpora of other tasks may introduce noise and potentially mislead the generation process. Last, when the retriever retrieves mislabeled (or counterfactual) information, the RAL may have the ability to discern that the retrieved knowledge is not conducive to output generation (as shown in Fig. 2E). To this end, we built the BioRAB to evaluate the ability of RAL in the biomedical domain, and we proposed four testbeds to test these abilities. In the next, we will detail these four abilities and how to construct the testbeds. Unlabeled robustness. Not all tasks have vast labeled retrieval corpus; therefore, for each task, the retriever must gather information from unlabeled corpora, while the RAL may still have the ability to generate the expected results. To evaluate the efficacy of RAL in this regard, we introduce our proposed unlabeled robustness testbed. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2B, the corpus of n is defined as the training set without value(label) for the n. The retriever retrieves Input sentence LLM Retriever Key Value Ouput ... Task data n Corpus of n: Input sentence LLM Retriever Key Ouput ... Task data n Corpus of n: Input sentence LLM Retriever Ouput Task data n Key Value ... Corpus of n: Input sentence LLM Retriever Ouput Task data n Key Value Corpus of 1 ... Key Value Corpus of (n-1) ... ... Input sentence LLM Retriever Task data n Key Value ... Corpus of n: Ouput True/False Unlabeled robustness Counterfactual robustness Diversity robustness Negative awarenessRAL Corpus of n: A B C D E Fig. 2. Overview of four testbeds on BioRAB. n refers to the special dataset for each task, such as Adecorpus- v2 (text classification), and Ph harmKG (link prediction). (A) represents the RL framework, where the retrieval corpus is labeled; (B) denotes the unlabeled retrieval corpus; and (C) refers to the retrieval corpus with counterfac - tual labels. in (D), the corpus of n refers to the set that includes the task datasets but excludes the training set of n. i n (E), to distinguish the difference between “Output” and “true/False, ” the “Output” is defined as the expected output for different tasks; for example, in the triple extraction task, the output is the triple. “true/False” refers to “the retrieved example is a negative example or the retrieved example is not a negative example. ” in our work, the n corpus of n refers to the training set of n. Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 10 of 12 the relevant information from this unlabeled corpus. After that, the retrieved Key with the input sentence is fed into the LLM. For example, in the training dataset of Adecorpus- v2 (classification task), if the label of a sentence S: “She had been administered tacrolimus for prophylaxis of graftversus- host reaction” is False in the X, I = “Y ou are an excellent linguist. The task is to predict whether this sentence is True or False, retrieved sentence: A macrophage activation syndrome, possibly related to methotrexate toxicity, developed in a boy with systemic juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, ” C = S, R = False. Counterfactual robustness. Constructing a highquality annotation corpus is challenging work, as it often involves dealing with incorrect data labeling. In our work, these mislabeled instances are called counterfactual instances. In the condition of the mislabeled corpus, the RAL may have the ability to avoid negative information. To validate the counterfactual robustness, we introduced our counterfactual robustness testbed. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2C, when constructing the corpus of n, we set the negative rate to be 20, 80, or 100%, corresponding to 20, 80, or 100% of instances being wrongly labeled, respectively. An example of incorrect annotation in a classification dataset would be if there are two labels, “True” and “False. ” If the true class of one instance is True, then its incorrect annotation would be False. Subsequently, the retriever is tasked with retrieving relevant information from this corpus.