Four abilities of BioRAL Despite the fact that RAL has achieved considerable success in solving the hallucination problem, in the biomedical domain, the ability of RAL is underexplored. First, not all tasks have vast labeled cor - pora. While many research endeavors use the training set as the corpus, they still encounter limitations when contrasted with larger corpora. If a RAL can achieve similar performance to the RAL that uses labeled corpus, it would demonstrate the former’s ability to operate effectively without relying on labeled data. For another, the RAL may easily be misled by incorrectly labeled information (as shown in Fig. 2C). Furthermore, RALs may have the capability to obtain useful information from labeled corpora of other tasks (as shown in Fig. 2D). However, retrieving knowledge from labeled corpora of other tasks may introduce noise and potentially mislead the generation process. Last, when the retriever retrieves mislabeled (or counterfactual) information, the RAL may have the ability to discern that the retrieved knowledge is not conducive to output generation (as shown in Fig. 2E). To this end, we built the BioRAB to evaluate the ability of RAL in the biomedical domain, and we proposed four testbeds to test these abilities. In the next, we will detail these four abilities and how to construct the testbeds. Unlabeled robustness. Not all tasks have vast labeled retrieval corpus; therefore, for each task, the retriever must gather information from unlabeled corpora, while the RAL may still have the ability to generate the expected results. To evaluate the efficacy of RAL in this regard, we introduce our proposed unlabeled robustness testbed. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2B, the corpus of n is defined as the training set without value(label) for the n. The retriever retrieves Input sentence LLM Retriever Key Value Ouput ... Task data n Corpus of n: Input sentence LLM Retriever Key Ouput ... Task data n Corpus of n: Input sentence LLM Retriever Ouput Task data n Key Value ... Corpus of n: Input sentence LLM Retriever Ouput Task data n Key Value Corpus of 1 ... Key Value Corpus of (n-1) ... ... Input sentence LLM Retriever Task data n Key Value ... Corpus of n: Ouput True/False Unlabeled robustness Counterfactual robustness Diversity robustness Negative awarenessRAL Corpus of n: A B C D E Fig. 2. Overview of four testbeds on BioRAB. n refers to the special dataset for each task, such as Adecorpus- v2 (text classification), and Ph harmKG (link prediction). (A) represents the RL framework, where the retrieval corpus is labeled; (B) denotes the unlabeled retrieval corpus; and (C) refers to the retrieval corpus with counterfac - tual labels. in (D), the corpus of n refers to the set that includes the task datasets but excludes the training set of n. i n (E), to distinguish the difference between “Output” and “true/False, ” the “Output” is defined as the expected output for different tasks; for example, in the triple extraction task, the output is the triple. “true/False” refers to “the retrieved example is a negative example or the retrieved example is not a negative example. ” in our work, the n corpus of n refers to the training set of n. Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 10 of 12 the relevant information from this unlabeled corpus. After that, the retrieved Key with the input sentence is fed into the LLM. For example, in the training dataset of Adecorpus- v2 (classification task), if the label of a sentence S: “She had been administered tacrolimus for prophylaxis of graftversus- host reaction” is False in the X, I = “Y ou are an excellent linguist. The task is to predict whether this sentence is True or False, retrieved sentence: A macrophage activation syndrome, possibly related to methotrexate toxicity, developed in a boy with systemic juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, ” C = S, R = False. Counterfactual robustness. Constructing a highquality annotation corpus is challenging work, as it often involves dealing with incorrect data labeling. In our work, these mislabeled instances are called counterfactual instances. In the condition of the mislabeled corpus, the RAL may have the ability to avoid negative information. To validate the counterfactual robustness, we introduced our counterfactual robustness testbed. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2C, when constructing the corpus of n, we set the negative rate to be 20, 80, or 100%, corresponding to 20, 80, or 100% of instances being wrongly labeled, respectively. An example of incorrect annotation in a classification dataset would be if there are two labels, “True” and “False. ” If the true class of one instance is True, then its incorrect annotation would be False. Subsequently, the retriever is tasked with retrieving relevant information from this corpus. The retrieved information, along with the input sentence, is fed into the LLM to generate the output. Diverse robustness . Diverse Robustness refers to the ability to incorporate diverse information from various task corpora. On the one hand, in numerous scenarios, the corpus from other tasks may contain valuable information to aid in generation. For instance, in the task of triple extraction, if a suitable triple extraction corpus is unavailable, the QA corpus may assist in extracting the necessary information. On the other hand, different tasks may introduce noise that could potentially impede the performance of the RAL. To generate better output, it is necessary for RAL to have the ability to retrieve diverse information. Thus, we introduce our diverse robustness testbed, as shown in Fig. 2D, when constructing the corpus of n, it incorporates corpora from other tasks. For instance, if n refers to the Chemprot (triple extraction task), the corpus of n includes corpora from tasks such as GIT (triple extraction task), PHarmKG (link prediction task), and so on. Next, the retriever is required to extract the pertinent information from the diverse corpus. Sub - sequently, the retrieved information, along with the input sentence, is fed into the LLM to generate the output. Negative awareness. Negative awareness evaluates the ability of LLMs to discern whether the retrieved information is negative (it is not conducive to the expected output). In realworld scenarios, if the retriever obtains negative information and the LLM can identify it as such, the LLM can then seek out more useful information to aid in generation based on this feedback. Thus, we introduce our negative awareness testbed, as shown in Fig. 2E, and we designate all values in the corpus of n as incorrect labels. After obtaining the retrieved documents from the corpus, the model is expected to produce two types of output. First, in the taskbased output, such as in the task of triple extraction, the output should be triple. Second, the model should also provide a judgment on whether the retrieved knowledge is negative or not. Evaluation metrics Taskbased metrics. In the triple extraction task, same as BiomedRAG (20), triple is regarded as correct when its relation type, the head entity, and the tail entity are all correct. For example, in the sentence Infusion of prostacyclin (PGI2) reportedly attenuates renal ischemic injury in the dog and the rat., triple < Infusion, treats, rat> is regarded as correct while < injury, treats, rat> is not. We evaluated all the models and reported the evaluation metric, including Micro Precision, Recall, and F1 score. For the text classification, link prediction, and QA task, we follow the same evaluation metrics as triple extraction.