An example of incorrect annotation in a classification dataset would be if there are two labels, “True” and “False. ” If the true class of one instance is True, then its incorrect annotation would be False. Subsequently, the retriever is tasked with retrieving relevant information from this corpus. The retrieved information, along with the input sentence, is fed into the LLM to generate the output. Diverse robustness . Diverse Robustness refers to the ability to incorporate diverse information from various task corpora. On the one hand, in numerous scenarios, the corpus from other tasks may contain valuable information to aid in generation. For instance, in the task of triple extraction, if a suitable triple extraction corpus is unavailable, the QA corpus may assist in extracting the necessary information. On the other hand, different tasks may introduce noise that could potentially impede the performance of the RAL. To generate better output, it is necessary for RAL to have the ability to retrieve diverse information. Thus, we introduce our diverse robustness testbed, as shown in Fig. 2D, when constructing the corpus of n, it incorporates corpora from other tasks. For instance, if n refers to the Chemprot (triple extraction task), the corpus of n includes corpora from tasks such as GIT (triple extraction task), PHarmKG (link prediction task), and so on. Next, the retriever is required to extract the pertinent information from the diverse corpus. Sub - sequently, the retrieved information, along with the input sentence, is fed into the LLM to generate the output. Negative awareness. Negative awareness evaluates the ability of LLMs to discern whether the retrieved information is negative (it is not conducive to the expected output). In realworld scenarios, if the retriever obtains negative information and the LLM can identify it as such, the LLM can then seek out more useful information to aid in generation based on this feedback. Thus, we introduce our negative awareness testbed, as shown in Fig. 2E, and we designate all values in the corpus of n as incorrect labels. After obtaining the retrieved documents from the corpus, the model is expected to produce two types of output. First, in the taskbased output, such as in the task of triple extraction, the output should be triple. Second, the model should also provide a judgment on whether the retrieved knowledge is negative or not. Evaluation metrics Taskbased metrics. In the triple extraction task, same as BiomedRAG (20), triple is regarded as correct when its relation type, the head entity, and the tail entity are all correct. For example, in the sentence Infusion of prostacyclin (PGI2) reportedly attenuates renal ischemic injury in the dog and the rat., triple < Infusion, treats, rat> is regarded as correct while < injury, treats, rat> is not. We evaluated all the models and reported the evaluation metric, including Micro Precision, Recall, and F1 score. For the text classification, link prediction, and QA task, we follow the same evaluation metrics as triple extraction. For the natural language inference task, we use the same evaluation metric (Macro F1) as the BioNLI. Negative awareness metrics. To assess negative awareness in our study, we define a negative instance as a mislabeled instance. In the first, we need to evaluate the model performance using mislabeled examples. For instance, in the Adecorpus- v2 classification data, with two labels True and False, this evaluation gauges the perfor - mance of True or False predictions. Typically, in the RAL framework, if the retrieved example contains the input sentence and its expected output, the LLM should achieve 100% performance when tested with the input sentence. Despite all instances in the retrieval corpus being mislabeled, the LLM may still generate the correct output when using these examples. In our experiments, we also investigate this aspect. Building on this discovery, we delineate two types of negative instances: 1. True negatives: When the negative instance is provided to the LLM along with the input sentence, resulting in the incorrect output. In this scenario, the number of input sentences is denoted as lt. 2. False negatives: When the negative instance is presented to the LLM alongside the input sentence, leading to the correct output. In this case, the number of input sentences is represented as lf. At the same time, we also expected the LLM could output “True— The retrieved example is negative example or False—The retrieved example is not a negative example” by providing a specific instruction, “Please determine whether the retrieved example constitutes negative information. If it is negative, please output False; if it is not negative, please output True” for each input sentence. For an input sentence that has falsenegative examples, if the LLM could output “False—The retrieved example is not a negative example, ” it demonstrates that the LLM recognizes the example as a false negative. After the judgment of LLM, the count of input sentences with “false negative examples” is denoted as f. For an input sentence that has true negative examples, if the LLM could output “True—The retrieved example is a negative example, ” it demonstrates that the LLM recognizes the example as a true negative. After the judgment of LLM, the count of input sentences with “true negative examples” is denoted as t. Thus, the true negative awareness rate is calculated by t/l t, and the false negative awareness rate is calculated by f/lf. Improving the robustness and awareness of RALs In this part, we mainly introduce our method to improve the robustness (counterfactual and unlabeled) and negative awareness ability of the RAL. Improving the counterfactual robustness of RALs In the context of mitigating mislabeled instances within a retrieved corpus, we propose a twostep approach consisting of a detection phase followed by a correction phase. This methodology ensures that errors introduced during data annotation or retrieval are systematically identified and rectified, thereby improving the quality of the corpus used for downstream tasks. In this work, we primarily focus on developing the testbed and therefore adopt a straightforward approach to address this issue. The investigation of more advanced Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 11 of 12 methods is left for future work. More specifically, the first step in our approach involves developing a mislabeled instance detector that systematically identifies erroneous labels. Following the detection phase, the mislabeled instance corrector is responsible for modifying the identified erroneous labels. Specifically, for example, in the case of a text classification task, we leverage incontext learning (ICL) with LLMs (e.g., GPT4) to assess the correctness of assigned labels, and use the internal knowledge to modify it. The prompt used for this process is as follows: “This is a text classification task. Please determine whether the label assigned to the input sentence is correct. If the label is incor - rect, please provide the correct label. ” Through this mechanism, the model systematically reviews each labeled instance and flags those suspected to be mislabeled. By using the insights from the LLM’s evaluation, the incorrect labels are revised accordingly. Improving the unlabeled robustness of RALs In the case of an unlabeled corpus, to enhance robustness in the absence of labeled data, we also leverage ICL with LLMs to assign labels. This is achieved by providing taskspecific instructions. The detailed prompt is as follows (using text classification as an example): “This is a text classification task aimed at determining whether a given sentence is related to an Adverse Drug Event (ADE). Please assign a label to each provided sentence to support this task. ” Improving the awareness of RALs To enhance the negative awareness of RALs, a key direction is to improve the model’s ability to distinguish between positive instances in the corpus—which contribute to generating the correct answer—and negative instances, which do not. For each input sentences x , there are hundreds or thousands of instance in the corpus not related to answer generation. On the basis of this observation, we design model S to help distinguish which instances are helpful for the final generation of the input x .