error generation Ade Four patients receiving highdose tamoxifen for greater than 1 year have demonstrated similar retinal changes. (tamoxifen, dosage, highdose) (tamoxifen, effect, retinal changes.) Git inactivation of serum alkaline phosphatase by adrenaline and related substances (Adrenaline, inhibits, alkaline phosphatase) (Alkaline phosphatase, interacts with, adrenaline) BiONLi – Positive Negative Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 8 of 12 Settings and dataset We evaluated five stateof- theart LLMs—LLamA213B, MedLLamA13B, LLaMA3 8B, Phi4 14B, and Qwen2.5 32B—along with three retrievers—BM25, Contriver, and MedCPT. We considered five biomedical NLP tasks: triple extraction, link prediction, text classification, QA, and natural language inference, across 11 datasets: ADE, ChemProt, GIT, PHarmKG, Hetionet, Adecorpus- v2, SemedCLass, MedMCQA, BioNLI, DS, and SDoH. The data statistics are shown in Table 8. The experiments were conducted using A100 GPUs. Three retrievers The three retrievers—BM25, Contriever, and MedCPT—use a structured process to retrieve the most relevant instances for enhancing LLM predictions. This process consists of three main steps: (i) The retrievers first compute the vector representation of the given input sentence using their respective retrieval models. BM25 uses termbased weighting, while Contriever and MedCPT rely on dense embeddings generated through neural networks. (ii) Each retriever then calculates the vector representation for every instance in the retrieval corpus. BM25 relies on traditional lexical matching, while Contriever and MedCPT use deep learning–based embeddings to encode semantic information. (iii) Last, the retrievers measure the similarity between the input sentence vector and each instance vector in the corpus. The most relevant instances, determined by the highest similarity scores, are selected and fed into the LLM alongside the input sentence as examples, helping the model generate more accurate predictions. Triple extraction dataset In this paper, we used ADE, Chemprot, and GIT as the foundational datasets. 1. ADE is extended from the relation extraction task to the triplet extraction task in this paper. All sentences either describe the effect of the drug or the dose of the drug. Thus, the triplets consist of (head entity: drug, relation type: effect, tail entity: effect_ description) and (head entity: drug, relation type: dosage, tail entity: dose_description). Among all triplets, there are only two relation types: effect and dosage. 2. ChemProt: The Chemical Protein Interaction Corpus comprises 2432 PubMed abstracts annotated with chemicalprotein interactions, encompassing 23 distinct interaction relations. Building upon prior research (19), the corpus exclusively considers sentencelevel instances, with a particular focus on five prominent interaction types for classification: CPR3, CPR4, CPR5, CPR6, and CPR9. 3. GIT is a highquality biomedical triple extraction dataset for nondrug therapies, characterized by its highquality annotations and comprehensive coverage of relation types. It includes 22 relation types from SemMedDB. Link prediction In this paper, we used PHarmKG and Hetionet as the foundational datasets in the link prediction task. 1. PHarmKG is a knowledge graph to describe the relationship among genes, drugs, and diseases. In this work, we aim to predict the four mentioned relation types (Interactions, DiseaseGene, DiseaseChemical, and ChemicalGene) between two entities. During the huge quantity of triples in the PHarmKG, we randomly select 4000 samples from the source training set for training, 500 samples from the source testing set for testing, and 500 samples from the source validation set for validation. 2. Hetionet is an integrative network of disease, which includes 46 relation types. In our paper, we randomly select 4000 samples from the source training set for training, 500 samples from the source testing set for testing, and 500 samples from the source validation set for validation. 3. Dietary supplement (DS). This task determines whether a dietary supplement is positively or negatively associated with a specific event, or if there is no direct relationship. It facilitates the identification of causeeffect relationships or therapeutic uses of dietary supplements. For example, the task would identify a negative association between “ginseng” and “nausea. ” Text classification In this paper, we used Adecorpus- v2 and SemdClass as the foundational dataset in the text classification task. 1. The ADECorpus- V2 dataset is designed to classify whether a sentence is related to an adverse drug event (ADE) (true) or not (false). In our paper, we randomly select 4000 instances for training, 500 for testing, and 500 for validation. 2. The SemdClass aims to understand whether the provided triple belongs to the given sentence or not. It includes two classes, false and true. 3. SDoH focuses on classifying Social and Behavioral Determinants of Health snippets. The dataset consists of 2364 annotated Table 8. Data statistics for the datasets we used in this work. Dataset Train Test Dev triple extraction Ade (21) 4970 2130 – chemProt (22) 4001 3355 2366 Git (23) 3734 465 492 Link prediction PharmKG (24) 4000 500 500 hetionet (25) 4000 500 500 Sdoh 3964 464 – text classification Adecorpus- v2 (21) 4000 500 500 Semdclass (26) 2400 600 600 dS 2127 237 – Question answering MedMcQA (27) 34,994 4183 4183 Natural language inference BioNLi (28) 5544 6308 12,807 Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 9 of 12 notes, categorized into 20 broad SDoH categories, covering various social factors that influence health outcomes. These categories include employment status, work conditions, access to food, housing status, income status, health literacy, insurance status, access to transportation, maltreatment history, environmental conditions, housing quality, neighborhood security, crime/incarceration history, social discrimination, social isolation, social support, immigrant status, substance abuse, physical activity, and sleep quality. QA and natural language inference In this paper, we used MedMCQA as the foundational dataset in the QA task and used BioNLI as the dataset of natural language inference. 1. MedMCQA is a multiplechoice QA dataset that is designed to address the medical entrance exam questions. In this work, we opt for the fivechoice version (A, B, C, D, and E). 2. BioNLI aims to understand whether the provided hypothesis is consistent or adversarial to the premise. Biomedical RetrievalAugmented Generation Benchmark In this part, we begin by outlining the operational flow of the RALs. Following this, we introduce the proposed four abilities and the building progress of four relevant testbeds. Last, we introduce the evaluation metrics used to assess performance. RAL working flow To solve the hallucination problem, RAL is proposed to retrieve the external knowledge from the corpus and improve the LLM perfor - mance. Generally, as shown in Fig. 2A, retrieved corpus needs to be constructed initially; in numerous QA RAL models, the corpus primarily originates from the unlabeled open source such as PubMed and Textbook. However, for some labelsensitive tasks, such as triple extraction, the unlabeled open source may be invalid. In our work, the corpus is defined as the training set for the relevant task. For instance, as illustrated in Fig. 2A, if “n” denotes the PHarmKG, each key corresponds to a sentence “what is the relationship between the head entity and tail entity?” in its training set, while the corresponding value denotes the relevant label relationship for that key. In the second step, the retriever is used to obtain the relevant (key, value) pairs from the corpus based on the input sentence. Last, the retrieved (key, value) pairs with the input sentence are fed into the LLM to generate the expected output.