Corpus of n: Ouput True/False Unlabeled robustness Counterfactual robustness Diversity robustness Negative awarenessRAL Corpus of n: A B C D E Fig. 2. Overview of four testbeds on BioRAB. n refers to the special dataset for each task, such as Adecorpus- v2 (text classification), and Ph harmKG (link prediction). (A) represents the RL framework, where the retrieval corpus is labeled; (B) denotes the unlabeled retrieval corpus; and (C) refers to the retrieval corpus with counterfac - tual labels. in (D), the corpus of n refers to the set that includes the task datasets but excludes the training set of n. i n (E), to distinguish the difference between “Output” and “true/False, ” the “Output” is defined as the expected output for different tasks; for example, in the triple extraction task, the output is the triple. “true/False” refers to “the retrieved example is a negative example or the retrieved example is not a negative example. ” in our work, the n corpus of n refers to the training set of n. Li et al., Sci. Adv. 11, eadr1443 (2025) 21 November 2025 ScieNce Adv ANceS | ReSeAR ch AR ticLe 10 of 12 the relevant information from this unlabeled corpus. After that, the retrieved Key with the input sentence is fed into the LLM. For example, in the training dataset of Adecorpus- v2 (classification task), if the label of a sentence S: “She had been administered tacrolimus for prophylaxis of graftversus- host reaction” is False in the X, I = “Y ou are an excellent linguist. The task is to predict whether this sentence is True or False, retrieved sentence: A macrophage activation syndrome, possibly related to methotrexate toxicity, developed in a boy with systemic juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, ” C = S, R = False. Counterfactual robustness. Constructing a highquality annotation corpus is challenging work, as it often involves dealing with incorrect data labeling. In our work, these mislabeled instances are called counterfactual instances. In the condition of the mislabeled corpus, the RAL may have the ability to avoid negative information. To validate the counterfactual robustness, we introduced our counterfactual robustness testbed. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2C, when constructing the corpus of n, we set the negative rate to be 20, 80, or 100%, corresponding to 20, 80, or 100% of instances being wrongly labeled, respectively. An example of incorrect annotation in a classification dataset would be if there are two labels, “True” and “False. ” If the true class of one instance is True, then its incorrect annotation would be False. Subsequently, the retriever is tasked with retrieving relevant information from this corpus. The retrieved information, along with the input sentence, is fed into the LLM to generate the output. Diverse robustness . Diverse Robustness refers to the ability to incorporate diverse information from various task corpora. On the one hand, in numerous scenarios, the corpus from other tasks may contain valuable information to aid in generation. For instance, in the task of triple extraction, if a suitable triple extraction corpus is unavailable, the QA corpus may assist in extracting the necessary information. On the other hand, different tasks may introduce noise that could potentially impede the performance of the RAL. To generate better output, it is necessary for RAL to have the ability to retrieve diverse information. Thus, we introduce our diverse robustness testbed, as shown in Fig. 2D, when constructing the corpus of n, it incorporates corpora from other tasks. For instance, if n refers to the Chemprot (triple extraction task), the corpus of n includes corpora from tasks such as GIT (triple extraction task), PHarmKG (link prediction task), and so on. Next, the retriever is required to extract the pertinent information from the diverse corpus. Sub - sequently, the retrieved information, along with the input sentence, is fed into the LLM to generate the output. Negative awareness. Negative awareness evaluates the ability of LLMs to discern whether the retrieved information is negative (it is not conducive to the expected output). In realworld scenarios, if the retriever obtains negative information and the LLM can identify it as such, the LLM can then seek out more useful information to aid in generation based on this feedback. Thus, we introduce our negative awareness testbed, as shown in Fig. 2E, and we designate all values in the corpus of n as incorrect labels. After obtaining the retrieved documents from the corpus, the model is expected to produce two types of output. First, in the taskbased output, such as in the task of triple extraction, the output should be triple. Second, the model should also provide a judgment on whether the retrieved knowledge is negative or not. Evaluation metrics Taskbased metrics. In the triple extraction task, same as BiomedRAG (20), triple is regarded as correct when its relation type, the head entity, and the tail entity are all correct. For example, in the sentence Infusion of prostacyclin (PGI2) reportedly attenuates renal ischemic injury in the dog and the rat., triple < Infusion, treats, rat> is regarded as correct while < injury, treats, rat> is not. We evaluated all the models and reported the evaluation metric, including Micro Precision, Recall, and F1 score. For the text classification, link prediction, and QA task, we follow the same evaluation metrics as triple extraction. For the natural language inference task, we use the same evaluation metric (Macro F1) as the BioNLI. Negative awareness metrics. To assess negative awareness in our study, we define a negative instance as a mislabeled instance. In the first, we need to evaluate the model performance using mislabeled examples. For instance, in the Adecorpus- v2 classification data, with two labels True and False, this evaluation gauges the perfor - mance of True or False predictions. Typically, in the RAL framework, if the retrieved example contains the input sentence and its expected output, the LLM should achieve 100% performance when tested with the input sentence. Despite all instances in the retrieval corpus being mislabeled, the LLM may still generate the correct output when using these examples. In our experiments, we also investigate this aspect. Building on this discovery, we delineate two types of negative instances: 1. True negatives: When the negative instance is provided to the LLM along with the input sentence, resulting in the incorrect output. In this scenario, the number of input sentences is denoted as lt. 2. False negatives: When the negative instance is presented to the LLM alongside the input sentence, leading to the correct output. In this case, the number of input sentences is represented as lf. At the same time, we also expected the LLM could output “True— The retrieved example is negative example or False—The retrieved example is not a negative example” by providing a specific instruction, “Please determine whether the retrieved example constitutes negative information. If it is negative, please output False; if it is not negative, please output True” for each input sentence. For an input sentence that has falsenegative examples, if the LLM could output “False—The retrieved example is not a negative example, ” it demonstrates that the LLM recognizes the example as a false negative. After the judgment of LLM, the count of input sentences with “false negative examples” is denoted as f. For an input sentence that has true negative examples, if the LLM could output “True—The retrieved example is a negative example, ” it demonstrates that the LLM recognizes the example as a true negative. After the judgment of LLM, the count of input sentences with “true negative examples” is denoted as t. Thus, the true negative awareness rate is calculated by t/l t, and the false negative awareness rate is calculated by f/lf. Improving the robustness and awareness of RALs In this part, we mainly introduce our method to improve the robustness (counterfactual and unlabeled) and negative awareness ability of the RAL.