Experiment 2 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded in context after being manually cleaned with the removal of non-informative data (e.g. page header and bibliography). Tables presented as images in the original text were manually converted into .csv ﬁles and then provided as context. Experiment 3 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded as context that were cleaned and formatted to provide a consistent structure alongside the whole document. In addition, we converted all tables from .csv ﬁles into text-based lists and included them in the main text. Each paragraph title was preceded by“Paragraph Title”. All the paragraph recommendations were collected and organized into a list preceded by “Paragraph Recommendations ”. Evidence reported in the main text was organized and preceded by “Paragraph Text”. Experiment 4 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded as context that were cleaned and formatted, with tables converted into text-based lists. We also provided a series of prompts (i.e., prompt engineering) that instructed the model on how to interpret the structured guidelines (Supplementary Table 1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01091-y Article npj Digital Medicine | (2024) 7:102 5 Experiment 5 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded as context that were cleaned and formatted, with tables converted into text-based lists. We included the series of prompts (i.e., prompt engineering) and added a series of 54 question-answer pairs (i.e. few-shot learning) (Supplementary Table 1). The experiments are summarized in Fig. 3 and were conducted on a local Python environment with OpenAI API access. Instructions, when provided, are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. We used foundational model default parameters, selecting a temperature of 0.9, and setting a maximum number of tokens in output equivalent to 800. Primary outcome Our primary outcome was to evaluate qualitative rates of accuracy according to expert grading based o n the information reported in EASL guidelines54. We repeated the query 5 times each for the 20 questions for each experimental setting and reported the proportion of accurate responses. Each answer was graded with a score of 1 if the text contained completely accurate information or 0 otherwise. Two expert hepatologists (M.G., with four years of experience in treating HCV patients, and L.S.C., with thirty years of experience in treating HCV patients) manually graded each response. The two graders were blind to each other and towards the experimental setting when labeling answers. Disagreements in grading occurred for 5.0% of outputs and were solved by consensus between the two graders. When outputs are considered inaccurate, the inaccuracy is caused by hallucinations (i.e., the production of plausible sounding but potentially unveriﬁed or incorrect information)57,58. According to the recent deﬁnitions of Zhang et al., we de ﬁned three types of hallucinations: FCH, ICH, and CCH59. Secondary outcome Our secondary outcome was to evaluate the similarity of LLM-generated responses to the human expert-provided answers used as the gold standard. In particular, an expert hepatologist (M.G.) provided a single answer for each of the 20 questions, which was reviewed and approved by the second expert hepatologist (L.S.C.), and th en used as the gold standard expert response to which LLM responses were compared in text-similarity using Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE)46, Bilingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU)45, Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit Ordering (METEOR)47, and a Custom OpenAI score (for in-depth Table 4 | List of questions Text-based questions 1. A screening blood test before a knee replacement surgery revealed a positive HCV antibody —what test should be performed to con ﬁrm HCV infection? 2. When a patient with HCV can be considered cured after HCV therapy? 3. Is there any major contraindication to HCV therapy? 4. Is it possible to apply treatment without determining genotype using grazoprevir/elbasvir? 5. What are the recommended treatment regimens and duration for a patient with HCV genotype 3 and no cirrhosis? 6. A patient on the transplantation list for HCC and decompensated liver cirrhosis should be treated before or after transplantation. 7. Should patients with HCV-positive patients be listed for kidney transplant treated? If yes, why? 8. Patients with ﬁbrosis F3, according to elastography, should be continuing HCC screening after successful HCV eradication? 9. Is HCV treatment during pregnancy recommended? 10. When should children born by an HCV-positive mother be tested for HCV infection? Table-based questions 11. What test can be used to assess the liver disease severity before treatment? 12. Is there any interaction between cyclosporine and DAAs? 13. Is there any interaction between apixaban and DAAs? 14. Among anticoagulants and antiplatelets which is the one medication with the lowest risk of interactions with DAAs? 15. What anticonvulsants are at higher risk of inducing drug interactions with DAAs? Clinical scenarios 16. A 45-year-old male with an unremarkable medical history was scheduled for a routine inguinal hernia surgery. As part of the preoperative evaluati on, he was tested for hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibodies, which returned positive. Subsequent HCV RNA testing con ﬁrmed active infection, and genotyping identi ﬁed the virus as HCV genotype 1a. The patient had no prior knowledge of his HCV status and had never been tested or treated for hepatitis C. Before initiating treatment, a liver elastography was performed to assess liver health, yielding a liver stiffness measurement of 5 kPa. What is the recommended treatment for this patient (drugs and du ration)? 17. A 55-year-old patient, previously lost to follow-up, returns to the liver clinic with a history of failed interferon-based therapy for HCV genoty pe 3. Recent laboratory tests conﬁrm active HCV infection with genotype 3, accompanied by elevated liver enzymes (AST: 100 IU/L, ALT: 150 IU/L). Additional laboratory results include bilirubin at 1.2 mg/dL, creatinine at 0.87 mg/dL, albumin at 3.9 g/dL, and an INR of 1.10. Liver elastography shows a liver stiffness measurement of 15 k Pa, without clinical signs of liver decompensation, as observed in the physical examination. What is the recommended therapy for this patient? 18. A 60-year-old patient with advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD) at stage 4 is diagnosed with Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. The patient ’s current renal function parameters include a creatinine clearance of 28 mL/min. Additionally, the patient presents with decompensated liver cirrhosis, classi ﬁed as Child-Pugh Class B8, indicating signiﬁcant liver dysfunction. What is the recommended therapy for this patient? 19. A 60-year-old female patient diagnosed with Hepatitis C virus (HCV) genotype 1a, who does not have liver cirrhosis, was recently prescribed a 12-w eek course of Sofosbuvir (400 mg)/Velpatasvir (100 mg). The patient has a signiﬁcant medical history of atrial ﬁbrillation, for which she is being treated with amiodarone. During the initial assessment with the hepatologist, the patient inadvertently omitted mentioning their amiodarone treatment. As of now, the patient has not commenced the HCV treatment. Is it advisable for the patient to promptly inform her hepatologist about the amiodarone treatment before starting the HCV therapy? 20.