Moreover, our ﬁndings suggest that with appropriate reformatting, few-shot learning may not increase overall accuracy. We highlight the need for further research to enhance LLM ’s ability to parse non-text sources and validate new metrics to evaluate not only similarity but also accuracyfor clinical LLM applications. Methods Guidelines selection We analyzed the current HCV guidelines from the prominent Northern American and European liver associations. Among these, we selected the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) on the Hepatitis C Virus, entitled “EASL recommendations on treatment of hepatitis C: Final update of the series” published in 202054, to explore our framework. The selected guideline comprised the most complex corpus of text containing broad recommendations on screening and management. In addition, the document contained in-depth information on drug-drug interactions, which was not reported in the Northern American 55,56 guidelines. We also tested our framework on speciﬁc questions that were not addressed in the European guidelines using the most up-to-date Northern American HCV guidelines (as reported in Supplementary Note 3, Supplementary Table 3, Supplementary Table 4, Supplementary Fig. 3, Supplementary Fig. 4). Standardized prompts creation Two expert hepatologists (M.G. and L.S.C.) drafted 20 representative questions (Table4). Fifteen questions addressed screening and management recommendations from each of the major sections, including the guideline main text (10 questions) and graphical tables (5 questions). Tables are a standard feature of clinical guidelines and summarize recommendations in speciﬁcw a y st h a tm a yn o tb er eﬂected in the text. In addition, the two experts drafted ﬁve comprehensive clinical cases, each reﬂecting different HCV-related management strategies, including best treatment selection, drug– drug interaction, and management of treatment severe adverse reactions. All the questions are structured to test reasoning and comprehension from both the main text and tables. Ablation study: customized LLM framework We used a combination of RAG using EASL HCV guidelines, in different experimental settings with increasing degrees of complexity regarding guideline reformatting, prompt architecture, and few-shot learning to create a customized framework applied to the GPT-4 Turbo model (released by OpenAI, in November 2023 with knowledge updated until April 202338). Experiments with the OpenAI’s Application Programming Interface (API) v. 1.17 cannot directly retrieve information from .pdf ﬁles. Therefore, the original pdf guidelines document was converted to a . txt ﬁle with UTF-8 encoding using the Python (v. 3.11) library PyPDF2 v3.0. We carried out an ablation study from the baseline (Experiments 1 through 5) to investigate how different settings in guideline reformatting, prompt architecture, and few-shot learning impact the accuracy and robustness of LLM outputs (Fig. 3). It is still unknown how non-text sources (e.g., graphical tables and ﬂowcharts) are processed by LLMs and whether the information extracted is accurate. Therefore, we performed preliminary experiments to test the accuracy of the GPT image conversion process (Supplementary Note 1) and found very low accuracy (16.0%) in extracting pertinent table information, with accuracy ranging from 0% (graphical tables) to 48.0% (only text tables). In light of these ﬁndings, we introduced text conversion of tables (non-text sources) into text-based lists and tested their impact on accuracy in Experiments 3, 4, and 5. Baseline. Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo without any context. For this experiment, we only provided the questions without any further instruction. Experiment 1 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded in context after pdf-to-text conversion in UTF-8 encoding without any additional text cleaning processes. Experiment 2 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded in context after being manually cleaned with the removal of non-informative data (e.g. page header and bibliography). Tables presented as images in the original text were manually converted into .csv ﬁles and then provided as context. Experiment 3 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded as context that were cleaned and formatted to provide a consistent structure alongside the whole document. In addition, we converted all tables from .csv ﬁles into text-based lists and included them in the main text. Each paragraph title was preceded by“Paragraph Title”. All the paragraph recommendations were collected and organized into a list preceded by “Paragraph Recommendations ”. Evidence reported in the main text was organized and preceded by “Paragraph Text”. Experiment 4 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded as context that were cleaned and formatted, with tables converted into text-based lists. We also provided a series of prompts (i.e., prompt engineering) that instructed the model on how to interpret the structured guidelines (Supplementary Table 1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01091-y Article npj Digital Medicine | (2024) 7:102 5 Experiment 5 . Use of the foundational GPT-4 Turbo with guidelines uploaded as context that were cleaned and formatted, with tables converted into text-based lists. We included the series of prompts (i.e., prompt engineering) and added a series of 54 question-answer pairs (i.e. few-shot learning) (Supplementary Table 1). The experiments are summarized in Fig. 3 and were conducted on a local Python environment with OpenAI API access. Instructions, when provided, are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. We used foundational model default parameters, selecting a temperature of 0.9, and setting a maximum number of tokens in output equivalent to 800. Primary outcome Our primary outcome was to evaluate qualitative rates of accuracy according to expert grading based o n the information reported in EASL guidelines54. We repeated the query 5 times each for the 20 questions for each experimental setting and reported the proportion of accurate responses. Each answer was graded with a score of 1 if the text contained completely accurate information or 0 otherwise. Two expert hepatologists (M.G., with four years of experience in treating HCV patients, and L.S.C., with thirty years of experience in treating HCV patients) manually graded each response. The two graders were blind to each other and towards the experimental setting when labeling answers. Disagreements in grading occurred for 5.0% of outputs and were solved by consensus between the two graders. When outputs are considered inaccurate, the inaccuracy is caused by hallucinations (i.e., the production of plausible sounding but potentially unveriﬁed or incorrect information)57,58. According to the recent deﬁnitions of Zhang et al., we de ﬁned three types of hallucinations: FCH, ICH, and CCH59. Secondary outcome Our secondary outcome was to evaluate the similarity of LLM-generated responses to the human expert-provided answers used as the gold standard. In particular, an expert hepatologist (M.G.) provided a single answer for each of the 20 questions, which was reviewed and approved by the second expert hepatologist (L.S.C.), and th en used as the gold standard expert response to which LLM responses were compared in text-similarity using Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE)46, Bilingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU)45, Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit Ordering (METEOR)47, and a Custom OpenAI score (for in-depth Table 4 | List of questions Text-based questions 1. A screening blood test before a knee replacement surgery revealed a positive HCV antibody —what test should be performed to con ﬁrm HCV infection? 2. When a patient with HCV can be considered cured after HCV therapy? 3. Is there any major contraindication to HCV therapy? 4. Is it possible to apply treatment without determining genotype using grazoprevir/elbasvir? 5. What are the recommended treatment regimens and duration for a patient with HCV genotype 3 and no cirrhosis? 6. A patient on the transplantation list for HCC and decompensated liver cirrhosis should be treated before or after transplantation. 7. Should patients with HCV-positive patients be listed for kidney transplant treated? If yes, why? 8. Patients with ﬁbrosis F3, according to elastography, should be continuing HCC screening after successful HCV eradication? 9. Is HCV treatment during pregnancy recommended? 10.