4. Is it possible to apply treatment without determining genotype using grazoprevir/elbasvir? 5. What are the recommended treatment regimens and duration for a patient with HCV genotype 3 and no cirrhosis? 6. A patient on the transplantation list for HCC and decompensated liver cirrhosis should be treated before or after transplantation. 7. Should patients with HCV-positive patients be listed for kidney transplant treated? If yes, why? 8. Patients with ﬁbrosis F3, according to elastography, should be continuing HCC screening after successful HCV eradication? 9. Is HCV treatment during pregnancy recommended? 10. When should children born by an HCV-positive mother be tested for HCV infection? Table-based questions 11. What test can be used to assess the liver disease severity before treatment? 12. Is there any interaction between cyclosporine and DAAs? 13. Is there any interaction between apixaban and DAAs? 14. Among anticoagulants and antiplatelets which is the one medication with the lowest risk of interactions with DAAs? 15. What anticonvulsants are at higher risk of inducing drug interactions with DAAs? Clinical scenarios 16. A 45-year-old male with an unremarkable medical history was scheduled for a routine inguinal hernia surgery. As part of the preoperative evaluati on, he was tested for hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibodies, which returned positive. Subsequent HCV RNA testing con ﬁrmed active infection, and genotyping identi ﬁed the virus as HCV genotype 1a. The patient had no prior knowledge of his HCV status and had never been tested or treated for hepatitis C. Before initiating treatment, a liver elastography was performed to assess liver health, yielding a liver stiffness measurement of 5 kPa. What is the recommended treatment for this patient (drugs and du ration)? 17. A 55-year-old patient, previously lost to follow-up, returns to the liver clinic with a history of failed interferon-based therapy for HCV genoty pe 3. Recent laboratory tests conﬁrm active HCV infection with genotype 3, accompanied by elevated liver enzymes (AST: 100 IU/L, ALT: 150 IU/L). Additional laboratory results include bilirubin at 1.2 mg/dL, creatinine at 0.87 mg/dL, albumin at 3.9 g/dL, and an INR of 1.10. Liver elastography shows a liver stiffness measurement of 15 k Pa, without clinical signs of liver decompensation, as observed in the physical examination. What is the recommended therapy for this patient? 18. A 60-year-old patient with advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD) at stage 4 is diagnosed with Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. The patient ’s current renal function parameters include a creatinine clearance of 28 mL/min. Additionally, the patient presents with decompensated liver cirrhosis, classi ﬁed as Child-Pugh Class B8, indicating signiﬁcant liver dysfunction. What is the recommended therapy for this patient? 19. A 60-year-old female patient diagnosed with Hepatitis C virus (HCV) genotype 1a, who does not have liver cirrhosis, was recently prescribed a 12-w eek course of Sofosbuvir (400 mg)/Velpatasvir (100 mg). The patient has a signiﬁcant medical history of atrial ﬁbrillation, for which she is being treated with amiodarone. During the initial assessment with the hepatologist, the patient inadvertently omitted mentioning their amiodarone treatment. As of now, the patient has not commenced the HCV treatment. Is it advisable for the patient to promptly inform her hepatologist about the amiodarone treatment before starting the HCV therapy? 20. A 70-year-old female with a recent diagnosis of Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) genotype 1a, con ﬁrmed to have no evidence of liver cirrhosis, commenced a treatment regimen consisting of a 12-week course of Sofosbuvir (400 mg) combined with Velpatasvir (100 mg) daily. The patient ’s baseline liver function tests were within normal limits, with an Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) level of 45 IU/L (normal range: 30–45 IU/L). However, upon re-evaluation 4 weeks post-treatment initiation, her ALT levels had markedly elevated to 1123 IU/L. Should the prescribed HCV treatment be discontinued in light of this signi ﬁcant ALT elevation? Two expert hepatologists drafted 20 questions that speci ﬁcally refer to information about management recommendations addressing information contained in the guideline main text (10 questions), graphical tables (5 questions), and clinical scenarios (5 questions). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01091-y Article npj Digital Medicine | (2024) 7:102 6 explanation see Supplementary Note 2). The Custom OpenAI score is based on cosine similarity, while the otherscores are based on word overlap and semantic coherence between two text sources. We evaluated the similarity by comparing LLM-generated answers to the corresponding ones provided by experts. All these scores are expressed on a scale from 0 to 1, where a score of 1 denotes perfect alignment between two compared text sources. The mean and standard deviation of the similarities were estimated after repeating the query 5 times each for the 20 questions. Fig. 3 | Depiction of Ablation Study experimental settings (Experiment 1 through Experiment 5) to investigate how guideline reformatting, prompt architec ture, and fewshot learning impact the accuracy and robustness of LLM outputs. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01091-y Article npj Digital Medicine | (2024) 7:102 7 Statistical analysis We employed the Chi-Square Test to compare accuracy among experiments qualitatively. We employed the Mann-Whitney U Test to compare differences among continuous scoring for automatic evaluation of answers. We considered statistically signiﬁcant a two-tailed p-value < 0.05. To conduct the analysis, we used Pythonv3 . 1 1and SciPy v1 . 1 1. Data availability All LLMs prompts are included in t he Summary Information with the prompts used. For any additional info rmation, please contact the corresponding authors. Code availability Code can be provided based on personal requests, please contact the corresponding authors. Received: 29 November 2023; Accepted: 29 March 2024;