npj | digital medicine Article Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01091-y Optimization of hepatological clinical guidelines interpretation by large language models: a retrieval augmented generation-based framework Check for updates Simone Kresevic1,2,4 , Mauro Giuffrè 2,4 , Milos Ajcevic1, Agostino Accardo1,L o r yS .C r o c è3 & Dennis L. Shung2 Large language models (LLMs) can potentially transform healthcare, particularly in providing the right information to the right provider at the right time in the hospital work ﬂow. This study investigates the integration of LLMs into healthcare, speci ﬁcally focusing on improving clinical decision support systems (CDSSs) through accurate interpretation of medical guidelines for chronic Hepatitis C Virus infection management. Utilizing OpenAI ’s GPT-4 Turbo model, we developed a customized LLM framework that incorporates retrieval augmented generation (RAG) and prompt engineering. Our framework involved guideline conversion into the best-structured format that can be ef ﬁciently processed by LLMs to provide the most accurate output. An ablation study was conducted to evaluate the impact of different formatting and learning strategies on the LLM ’s answer generation accuracy. The baseline GPT-4 Turbo model’s performance was compared against ﬁve experimental setups with increasing levels of complexity: inclusion of in-context guidelines, guideline reformatting, and implementation of few-shot learning. Our primary outcome was the qualitative assessment of accuracy based on expert review, while secondary outcomes included the quantitative measurement of similarity of LLM-generated responses to expert-provided answers using text-similarity scores. The results showed a signi ﬁcant improvement in accuracy from 43 to 99% ( p < 0.001), when guidelines were provided as context in a coherent corpus of text and non-text sources were converted into text. In addition, few-shot learning did not seem to improve overall accuracy. The study highlights that structured guideline reformatting and advanced prompt engineering (data quality vs. data quantity) can enhance the ef ﬁcacy of LLM integrations to CDSSs for guideline delivery. Large language models (LLMs) have the potential to improve healthcare due to their capability to parse complex concepts and generate appropriate responses. LLMs have demonstrated proﬁciency in tasks across the spectrum of clinical activity, such as medical inquiry responses, dialogue systems, and the synthesis and completion of clinical reports1– 5. One potential high-value area for LLMs is the ability to promote evidence-based practice through providing clinical decisionsupport systems (CDSSs) according to current medical guidelines, which are distillations of both expert opinion and current evidence from clinical trials and are used to drive improvements in patient outcomes through best practices6,7. LLMs have enjoyed wide public uptake, especially OpenAI’sC h a t G P T (https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt), which enrolled over 100 million users within two months of its release8,9. The widespread use of ChatGPT allowed simple and user-friendly use of generative artiﬁcial intelligence for real-life scenarios and academic research. However, a primary concern for LLMs application in healthcare is the potential risk of inaccurate responses (e.g., 1Department of Engineering and Architecture, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.