The safety of the triage recommendation as well as the tendency to overor undertriage were important outcomes associated with triage accuracy. These also resulted in some of the studies (3/13, 23%) estimating the potential impact on service use, which diverged among studies, partly because some of the tools promoted overuse of services whereas others tended to undertriage users. Strengths and Limitations We conducted a comprehensive search by repeatedly revising and reviewing our search strategy and search terms, including manually searching reference lists. Highly inclusive searches yielded a significant number of initial results, which we screened in pairs to limit errors. However, we acknowledge that eligible studies might have been excluded or omitted and that relevant papers in gray literature or papers written in languages other than English or published before 2010 might also have been excluded owing to our selection criteria. The included studies were all conducted in high-income countries, which may limit the wider generalizability of the findings. Comparison among studies was particularly difficult because of the variety of study designs, outcome measures, populations, and tools considered. In addition, 4 (29%) of the 14 studies evaluated >10 OSCs, adding to the complexity of comparisons. Triage accuracy, which consistently appeared as the main outcome of interest across studies, was measured using varying numbers of categories as well as different time periods and triage locations, thus limiting further the possibility for objective head-to-head comparisons. The lack of a common methodology for evaluating OSCs strongly limits the possibility of comparison among tools and studies. It is pertinent too that all 14 studies had at least 1 area with an unclear risk of bias, and 6 (43%) of the 14 studies had a high risk of bias. Comparison With Prior Work Two previous systematic reviews assessed the literature on a similar topic. The 2019 systematic review by Chambers et al [12] included any type of publication, including gray literature, but was limited to studies relating to urgent health issues only. The evidence was assessed as being mostly weak and insufficient to determine the level of safety of digital symptom checkers and OSCs for patients. More recently, Wallace et al [11] published a systematic review on the diagnostic and triage accuracy of OSCs, including specialty-specific tools, but the search was restricted to MEDLINE and Web of Science up to February 15, 2021. Both triage accuracy and diagnostic accuracy of the OSCs were found to be mostly low despite variations. Reliance on these tools was therefore considered as posing a potential clinical risk. The identification of 7 new studies published since mid-February 2021, along with increasing use of OSCs during the COVID-19 pandemic despite cautionary calls, motivated us to conduct this review. This review aimed to not only update but also strengthen the quality of the evidence by including only peer-reviewed papers and focusing on OSCs for general health concerns (nonspecialty specific). However, the evidence remains inconsistent and calls both for caution in promoting OSCs and the need for further studies to improve and inform future development of these tools. Implications for Research and Practice Most of the included studies (10/14, 71%) highlighted that OCS performance tended to remain low and that further improvements, testing, and research are needed. Although there is a sense in commentaries and previous studies [12] that OSCs tend to overtriage and thus should be considered risk averse, our review identified several instances of undertriage among OSCs. This finding is concerning because it suggests a risk of delay in accessing care for individuals using these decision-support tools. The impact of overtriage on health services must also be considered because this might negatively affect the quality of services provided and thus ultimately represent a risk for service users. Additional work is urgently needed to understand the extent and implications of inappropriate triage recommendations of existing publicly available OSCs, which require a real-life assessment of rates of user compliance with the tool’s advice. The ability of OSCs to change or direct the behavior of users through the provision of triage recommendations remains unclear; this has significant implications for their likely impact on health service use and health outcomes. Current evidence on user compliance remains scarce and inconsistent: studies with relatively positive results tend to be limited to users’ intention to follow the recommendation [26,33] or to experiments with vignettes instead of users’ own symptoms [34]. Meanwhile, 2 other studies reported less encouraging results, with few users following the ED visit advice [8] or a majority of patients in a primary care waiting room not changing their decision to see the GP despite the OSC’s alternative advice to wait and self-care [35]. Interestingly, the evaluation of the telephone advice and triage service NHS 111 also showed poor compliance with advice, with 11% of the patients advised to self-care or seek primary care attending the ED [36]. Four (29%) of the included 14 studies offered suggestions for improvement of OSCs, including incorporating local, regional, and seasonal epidemiological data, along with individual clinical data [14,27], as well as more efficient inclusion of demographic data in the algorithm [14]. Authors also suggested that, despite J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e43803 | p. 13https://www.jmir.org/2023/1/e43803 (page number not for citation purposes) Riboli-Sasco et alJOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX their limitations, OSCs could still be useful for tracking epidemiological data, self-education of users about their health, improving patient-physician relationships and directing users to appropriate care (especially for tools that are directly linked with health care services) [22], and supporting the use of AI-based symptom assessment technology in diagnostic decision support for GPs [17]. More studies are needed to clearly assess the triage and diagnostic accuracy of OSCs for all potential users. The lack of consensus on how OSCs should be evaluated by any national or international regulatory body means that developers produce their own evidence to validate products to meet regulatory requirements (UK Conformity Assessed [UKCA] and Conformité Européenne [CE] markings). There is a need for additional research into the methods of evaluating OSCs, including how to establish a gold standard response and determine appropriate accuracy and safety scores in comparison with this gold standard. A consensus agreement on what could be deemed an acceptable rate of underor overtriage would also be required. Specific evidence standards should be provided for OSCs to augment existing guidance, such as the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) evidence standards framework and the evaluation requirements for medical device certification with the Medicines & Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). A set of congruent requirements for the standardized vignette-based clinical evaluation process of OSCs has been proposed with this aim [37]. Future studies should ideally be based on the direct input of real-life patients, who would be best placed to enter their own symptoms into the OSCs to allow a better assessment of real-world performances, instead of mostly fictional clinician-authored vignettes or medical records drafted and entered by researchers who are likely to be prone to bias. In addition, the study populations should be broad and diverse in terms of race, age, sex, gender, social class, education, and abilities because these characteristics have been correlated with differential and possibly discriminatory treatment by an HCP in real-life encounters in multiple countries and settings [38-41]. For several communities and individuals, including ethnic minorities, migrants, and women, as well as gender nonconforming and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) communities [42], the use of an OSC might potentially represent a safer, more accessible, and more accurate option than a real-life encounter with an HCP. However, if these communities are not included and accounted for in the design and testing of digital technology, including OSCs, such discriminations might be further reinforced [43]. Achieving health equity requires a shift in methodologies and perspectives, including the adoption of a feminist intersectional lens in digital health [44]. Finally, although OSCs may be perceived as useful [8], there may also be issues in understanding and interpreting the recommendations provided [45], making accessibility, usability, and interpretability the key factors to consider when designing, promoting, and evaluating these tools. In response to the limitations inherent in current evaluations of OSCs, several authors have called for a multistage-process evaluation of increasing exposure to real-life clinical environments in proportion to OSC system maturity, taking place both before and after the tool’s launch and including the testing of different aspects of the OSC, such as usability, effectiveness, and safety [46-51]. Conclusions OSCs have a significant potential to provide accessible and accurate health advice and triage recommendations to patients. If clinical safety is assured through reproducible evidence of diagnostic and triage accuracy, OSCs could have a valuable place in a sustainable health system, with the potential to support individuals to self-care more regularly for self-limiting conditions while also directing them to appropriate health care assessment when needed. This arrangement could also help to rationalize the use of health care products and services and reduce unnecessary pressure on HCPs and health systems in a variety of settings. Our review highlighted inconsistent evidence across the included studies regarding the triage and diagnostic accuracy of OSCs for general health concerns. As the congruent use of these tools continues to increase, especially after the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is essential that researchers, developers, and HCPs work together and engage with users to ensure OSCs' safety and accuracy before their widescale adoption in home, community, and health care settings. Acknowledgments ER-S, AE-O, IW, AA, and BH are in part supported by the National Institute for Health and Care Research Applied Research Collaboration Northwest London. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Health Service, the National Institute for Health and Care Research, or the Department of Health and Social Care. Data Availability The search strategies, the list of online symptom checkers tested and measurements used by the included studies, and data extraction table (including the data extracted from the included studies) are provided as multimedia appendices. Any desired additional data can be made available by authors upon request. Authors' Contributions BH and AE-O conceptualized the study. AE-O and ER-S took the lead in planning the study with support from the coauthors. ER-S led the data analysis with support from IW, AA, MK, KP, MLEA, and AP and oversight from BH and AE-O. All authors J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e43803 | p. 14https://www.jmir.org/2023/1/e43803 (page number not for citation purposes) Riboli-Sasco et alJOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX provided substantial contributions to the study design, data acquisition, and interpretation of study data and approved the final version of the paper. BH is the guarantor. Conflicts of Interest AP previously worked for Babylon Health, an OSC provider (June 2019-July 2020). BH previously worked for Healthily, an OSC provider (Nov 2019-May 2021). Multimedia Appendix 1 PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) checklist. [DOC File , 73 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1] Multimedia Appendix 2 Search strategies. [DOC File , 29 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2] Multimedia Appendix 3 Data extraction form with all extracted data. [XLSX File (Microsoft Excel File), 35 KB-Multimedia Appendix 3] Multimedia Appendix 4 List of online symptom checkers tested and measurements used by the included studies. [DOC File , 47 KB-Multimedia Appendix 4]