Review Triage and Diagnostic Accuracy of Online Symptom Checkers: Systematic Review Eva Riboli-Sasco, MA; Austen El-Osta, MSc, MPA, PhD; Aos Alaa, MPH; Iman Webber, BSc; Manisha Karki, MPH; Marie Line El Asmar, MPH, MD; Katie Purohit, BCHIR; Annabelle Painter, BMBCh, MA; Benedict Hayhoe, MD Self-Care Academic Research Unit (SCARU), Department of Primary Care and Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom Corresponding Author: Eva Riboli-Sasco, MA Self-Care Academic Research Unit (SCARU) Department of Primary Care and Public Health Imperial College London 323 Reynolds Building Charing Cross Hospital London, W6 8RF United Kingdom Phone: 44 207 594 7604 Email: e.riboli-sasco@imperial.ac.uk Abstract Background: In the context of a deepening global shortage of health workers and, in particular, the COVID-19 pandemic, there is growing international interest in, and use of, online symptom checkers (OSCs). However, the evidence surrounding the triage and diagnostic accuracy of these tools remains inconclusive. Objective: This systematic review aimed to summarize the existing peer-reviewed literature evaluating the triage accuracy (directing users to appropriate services based on their presenting symptoms) and diagnostic accuracy of OSCs aimed at lay users for general health concerns. Methods: Searches were conducted in MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, Health Management Information Consortium (HMIC), and Web of Science, as well as the citations of the studies selected for full-text screening. We included peer-reviewed studies published in English between January 1, 2010, and February 16, 2022, with a controlled and quantitative assessment of either or both triage and diagnostic accuracy of OSCs directed at lay users. We excluded tools supporting health care professionals, as well as diseaseor specialty-specific OSCs. Screening and data extraction were carried out independently by 2 reviewers for each study. We performed a descriptive narrative synthesis. Results: A total of 21,296 studies were identified, of which 14 (0.07%) were included. The included studies used clinical vignettes, medical records, or direct input by patients. Of the 14 studies, 6 (43%) reported on triage and diagnostic accuracy, 7 (50%) focused on triage accuracy, and 1 (7%) focused on diagnostic accuracy. These outcomes were assessed based on the diagnostic and triage recommendations attached to the vignette in the case of vignette studies or on those provided by nurses or general practitioners, including through face-to-face and telephone consultations. Both diagnostic accuracy and triage accuracy varied greatly among OSCs. Overall diagnostic accuracy was deemed to be low and was almost always lower than that of the comparator. Similarly, most of the studies (9/13, 69 %) showed suboptimal triage accuracy overall, with a few exceptions (4/13, 31%). The main variables affecting the levels of diagnostic and triage accuracy were the severity and urgency of the condition, the use of artificial intelligence algorithms, and demographic questions. However, the impact of each variable differed across tools and studies, making it difficult to draw any solid conclusions. All included studies had at least one area with unclear risk of bias according to the revised Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 tool. Conclusions: Although OSCs have potential to provide accessible and accurate health advice and triage recommendations to users, more research is needed to validate their triage and diagnostic accuracy before widescale adoption in community and health care settings. Future studies should aim to use a common methodology and agreed standard for evaluation to facilitate objective benchmarking and validation. Trial Registration: PROSPERO CRD42020215210; https://tinyurl.com/3949zw83 (J Med Internet Res 2023;25:e43803) doi: 10.2196/43803 J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e43803 | p. 1https://www.jmir.org/2023/1/e43803 (page number not for citation purposes) Riboli-Sasco et alJOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX KEYWORDS systematic review; digital triage; diagnosis; online symptom checker; safety; accuracy; mobile phone Introduction Background The global shortage of health workers anticipated by the World Health Organization (WHO) is expected to increase from 7.2 million in 2013 to 12.9 million by 2035 [1]. Online symptom checkers (OSCs) have been promoted as a way of supporting more rational use of health care services while saving time for patients, reducing anxiety, and allowing them to take more ownership of their health (self-care) [2,3]. OSCs are web-based tools that can be accessed using a computer, tablet device, or smartphone via a website or an app. On the basis of responses to a series of questions, OSCs may suggest a possible diagnosis and a triage recommendation to inform the next steps [4]. The triage function guides users on whether they should seek a health care assessment, the setting (eg, emergency department [ED] or general practice clinic), and the degree of urgency (eg, immediately, within a few days, or weeks) [5]. The use of OSCs has exploded in recent years. In the United Kingdom, the National Health Service (NHS) 111 online service, which registered 2 million contacts in 2019, reached 7.5 million visits during the first 10 months of 2020, mainly as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic [6]. OSCs may indeed provide patients with a more personalized assessment than search engines such as Google [7] and can be used to not only get a diagnosis or a triage recommendation without going to a physician but also learn more about the cause of symptoms or better understand a diagnosis [8]. Studies focused on COVID-19 OSCs showed that these tools tend to have high overall user satisfaction [9] and can help support remote care and self-management, thus reducing the demands on clinicians and health services [10]. However, the potential benefits of OSCs, whether individual or collective, depend primarily on their safety and accuracy. If inadequately designed, they could misdiagnose and misdirect users, potentially diverting them from seeking adequate care or, conversely, placing additional strain on health systems. Two systematic reviews assessed the literature evaluating OSCs [11,12] with mostly weak evidence regarding their diagnostic and triage accuracy. One review focused only on urgent health issues [12], whereas the other included specialty-specific OSCs [11]; both were outdated after the recent publication of several eligible studies. Objectives This systematic review aimed to update and summarize the peer-reviewed literature evaluating the triage accuracy (defined as directing users to appropriate services based on their presenting symptoms) and diagnostic accuracy of OSCs aimed at lay users for general health concerns. Methods This systematic review was conducted following the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines [13] (Multimedia Appendix 1 [13]). Eligibility Criteria All inclusion and exclusion criteria are presented in Textbox 1. J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e43803 | p. 2https://www.jmir.org/2023/1/e43803 (page number not for citation purposes) Riboli-Sasco et alJOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Textbox 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria. Inclusion criteria • Article type: peer-reviewed articles only • Language: English • Publication dates: January 1, 2010, to February 16, 2022 • Population: general population of any age seeking advice digitally regarding how to address, manage, and treat their symptoms and potential health issues, ranging from minor to acute and including long-term conditions • Intervention: any web-based or digital service that suggests either or both a probable diagnosis and a triage recommendation based on the symptoms inputted by users; these online symptom checkers may be apps, websites, or any other digital platforms (including prototypes) accessible through a mobile phone, tablet device, or computer • Comparator: triage and diagnosis attached to the vignette or assigned via telephone or face-to-face consultation with a general practitioner or nurse • Outcomes: quantitative data on diagnostic and triage accuracy of tested online symptom checker • Study design: observational studies, randomized or nonrandomized controlled trials, controlled before-after studies, or interrupted time series studies Exclusion criteria • Article type: dissertations, conference proceedings, abstracts, and all non–peer-reviewed papers • Language: any language other than English • Publication dates: before 2010 or after February 16, 2022 • Population: specific age or patient group (eg, patients with COVID-19 symptoms or children only) • Intervention: tools that only provide an asynchronous web-based consultation (eg, via email) or health advice without diagnosis or triage, as well as those that were specific to age, disease, or specialty • Comparator: no comparator • Outcomes: not applicable • Study design: all study designs other than observational studies, randomized or nonrandomized controlled trials, controlled before-after studies, or interrupted time series studies Search Strategy A scoping review was conducted after consulting with a research librarian to help establish search terms. An initial list of search terms was compiled and applied to MEDLINE and Embase to confirm the relevance of the results. Reference lists from several relevant studies and similar reviews were manually searched to expand the search terms and refine the search strategies. Medical Subject Headings were adapted for each database. Searches were carried out on February 17, 2022 (searching for studies published between January 1, 2010, and February 16, 2022). We searched the following 5 databases: MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, Health Management Information Consortium (HMIC), and Web of Science. No manual searching was performed, but we screened the references of all studies selected for full-text screening. The final list of search terms for each database is presented in Multimedia Appendix 2. Study Selection The studies retrieved were first imported into EndNote X7 (Clarivate) to help identify and remove duplicates. The included studies were then entered in Covidence (Veritas Health Innovation Ltd), where additional duplicates were removed. Titles and abstracts were screened by 2 researchers. The full text of potentially eligible studies was then independently assessed by 2 researchers. Studies where the primary reviewers disagreed were reviewed independently by a third researcher; any remaining disagreement was resolved through team discussion. Data Extraction After full-text screening, data extraction was carried out by 2 researchers independently for each study using a comprehensive standardized extraction form designed for the specific characteristics of this review and refined after the testing of 2 (14%) of the 14 studies. Key areas of data collection were the study sample size and characteristics; reference standard, measures, and levels of triage and diagnostic accuracy; and any additional comparator and reported outcomes. The detailed data extraction table is presented in Multimedia Appendix 3 [14-27]. Risk of Bias and Applicability Two researchers independently assessed the risk of bias and applicability concerns using a revised version of the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 (QUADAS-2) tool [28] for the domains of patient selection, performance of the index test, performance of the reference test, and flow and timing (for risk of bias only). Conflicts were resolved through discussion. No study was excluded based on quality assessment. We also assessed the overall strength of evidence (quality and relevance) for both main outcomes using an adaptation of the method described by Chambers et al [12] in their review. This J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e43803 | p. 3https://www.jmir.org/2023/1/e43803 (page number not for citation purposes) Riboli-Sasco et alJOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX involved classifying evidence based on study numbers, risk of bias, and levels of consistency among the findings. Analysis We performed a descriptive narrative synthesis as well as a strength-of-evidence assessment structured around the prespecified research questions and outcomes to describe the collective findings of the included studies. Wide variations in design and methodology made meta-analyses impractical. Results A total of 21,284 records were identified through initial searches, with an additional 12 studies identified through citation searching.