Only the one for the triage accuracy had a high risk of bias. Overall Strength-of-Evidence Assessment The overall strength of evidence for key outcomes is summarized in Table 5. Although there is rather strong evidence that the diagnostic accuracy of OSCs tends to be lower than that of health care professionals (HCPs), the strength of evidence is more variable regarding triage accuracy. J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e43803 | p. 11https://www.jmir.org/2023/1/e43803 (page number not for citation purposes) Riboli-Sasco et alJOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Table 5. Overall strength of evidence by main outcome. Strength of evidenceEvidence statementRelevant studiesOutcome and reference standard (and additional comparator) Diagnostic accuracy ModerateDespite great variations among OSCsd, overall diagnostic accuracy was deemed to be low and always lower than that of the reference standard. •• Berry et al [16]cGPa (F2Fb consultation) StrongDespite great variations among OSCs, overall diagnostic accuracy was deemed to be low and always lower than that of the reference standard. •• Semigran et al [14]cAttributed to the vignette • Ceney et al [21]c StrongDespite great variations among OSCs, overall diagnostic accuracy was deemed to be low and always lower than that of the reference standard. •• Hill et al [22]cAttributed to the vignette and confirmed by GPs • Gilbert et al [23]c StrongDespite great variations among OSCs, overall diagnostic accuracy was deemed to be low and always lower than that of the reference standard and of the comparator (GPs). •• Gilbert et al [17]cAttributed to the vignette • GPs as additional comparator • Semigran et al [15]c Triage accuracy ModerateDespite some variations among OSCs, including relatively high levels of triage accuracy in the study by Verzantvoort et al [26], triage accuracy was always lower than that of the reference standard. However, the study by Verzantvoort et al [26] and the study by Yu et al [27] both had 1 area each with a high risk of bias. •• Verzantvoort et al [26]cTriage nurses • Trivedi et al [24]c • Dickson et al [20]c • Yu et al [27]c InconsistentFindings were inconsistent, with great variations between studies that evaluated 2 different OSCs. However, the reference standard chosen in the study by Poote et al [19]c has a high risk of bias. •• Poote et al [19]cGPs • Delshad et al [18]e ModerateOverall triage accuracy was lower than that of the reference standard but considered high and higher than that of the additional comparator (patients). •• Chan et al [25]eGPs • Patients’self-triage as additional comparator StrongThere was great variation among OSCs. Overall triage accuracy was always lower than that of the reference standard and considered to be low. •• Semigran et al [14]cAttributed to the vignette • Gilbert et al [23]c WeakDespite some variations among OSCs, triage accuracy was deemed to be low and always lower than that of the reference standard. However, the index test chosen has a high risk of bias. •• Hill et al [22]cAttributed to the vignette & confirmed by GPs ModerateThere was great variation among OSCs. Overall triage accuracy was always lower than the reference standard, but some OSCs performed almost as well as the additional comparator (GPs). •• Gilbert et al [17]fAttributed to the vignette • GPs as additional comparator WeakOverall triage accuracy was deemed to be low and always lower than reference standard. However, the reference standard chosen has a high risk of bias. •• Berry et al [16]cPatients’ self-triage ModerateOverall triage accuracy was deemed to be low, with a few exceptions and great variations among OSCs but always lower than the reference standard. •• Ceney et al [21]cNICEg guidance aGP: general practitioner. bF2F: face-to-face. cWorst outcome with online symptom checkers. dOSC: online symptom checker. eBetter outcome with online symptom checkers. fVarying results within study. gNICE: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e43803 | p. 12https://www.jmir.org/2023/1/e43803 (page number not for citation purposes) Riboli-Sasco et alJOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Discussion Principal Findings Evidence on the triage and diagnostic accuracy of OSCs suggests that they are currently not a viable replacement for other triage and diagnostic options such as telephone triage or in-person consultations. Furthermore, some of the OSCs performed well regarding triage accuracy but poorly regarding diagnostic accuracy and vice versa. Studies evaluating various OSCs also revealed important performance variations among them. Several of the studies (5/14, 36%) found that the condition’s frequency (2/14, 14%) and urgency (5/14, 36%) could affect diagnostic and triage accuracy levels but with mixed conclusions. In addition, some specific OSC characteristics may also play a role, including the use of AI, self-reported demographic and anthropomorphic data, the maximum number of diagnoses provided, or the use of nurse triage protocols. Some characteristics of the study population were also shown to affect the level of triage and diagnostic accuracy, including the source of the vignettes as well as the health status of patients or the geographic specificity of diseases and symptoms. The safety of the triage recommendation as well as the tendency to overor undertriage were important outcomes associated with triage accuracy. These also resulted in some of the studies (3/13, 23%) estimating the potential impact on service use, which diverged among studies, partly because some of the tools promoted overuse of services whereas others tended to undertriage users. Strengths and Limitations We conducted a comprehensive search by repeatedly revising and reviewing our search strategy and search terms, including manually searching reference lists. Highly inclusive searches yielded a significant number of initial results, which we screened in pairs to limit errors. However, we acknowledge that eligible studies might have been excluded or omitted and that relevant papers in gray literature or papers written in languages other than English or published before 2010 might also have been excluded owing to our selection criteria. The included studies were all conducted in high-income countries, which may limit the wider generalizability of the findings. Comparison among studies was particularly difficult because of the variety of study designs, outcome measures, populations, and tools considered. In addition, 4 (29%) of the 14 studies evaluated >10 OSCs, adding to the complexity of comparisons. Triage accuracy, which consistently appeared as the main outcome of interest across studies, was measured using varying numbers of categories as well as different time periods and triage locations, thus limiting further the possibility for objective head-to-head comparisons. The lack of a common methodology for evaluating OSCs strongly limits the possibility of comparison among tools and studies. It is pertinent too that all 14 studies had at least 1 area with an unclear risk of bias, and 6 (43%) of the 14 studies had a high risk of bias. Comparison With Prior Work Two previous systematic reviews assessed the literature on a similar topic. The 2019 systematic review by Chambers et al [12] included any type of publication, including gray literature, but was limited to studies relating to urgent health issues only. The evidence was assessed as being mostly weak and insufficient to determine the level of safety of digital symptom checkers and OSCs for patients. More recently, Wallace et al [11] published a systematic review on the diagnostic and triage accuracy of OSCs, including specialty-specific tools, but the search was restricted to MEDLINE and Web of Science up to February 15, 2021. Both triage accuracy and diagnostic accuracy of the OSCs were found to be mostly low despite variations. Reliance on these tools was therefore considered as posing a potential clinical risk. The identification of 7 new studies published since mid-February 2021, along with increasing use of OSCs during the COVID-19 pandemic despite cautionary calls, motivated us to conduct this review. This review aimed to not only update but also strengthen the quality of the evidence by including only peer-reviewed papers and focusing on OSCs for general health concerns (nonspecialty specific). However, the evidence remains inconsistent and calls both for caution in promoting OSCs and the need for further studies to improve and inform future development of these tools. Implications for Research and Practice Most of the included studies (10/14, 71%) highlighted that OCS performance tended to remain low and that further improvements, testing, and research are needed. Although there is a sense in commentaries and previous studies [12] that OSCs tend to overtriage and thus should be considered risk averse, our review identified several instances of undertriage among OSCs. This finding is concerning because it suggests a risk of delay in accessing care for individuals using these decision-support tools. The impact of overtriage on health services must also be considered because this might negatively affect the quality of services provided and thus ultimately represent a risk for service users. Additional work is urgently needed to understand the extent and implications of inappropriate triage recommendations of existing publicly available OSCs, which require a real-life assessment of rates of user compliance with the tool’s advice. The ability of OSCs to change or direct the behavior of users through the provision of triage recommendations remains unclear; this has significant implications for their likely impact on health service use and health outcomes.