A total of 48 different symptom checkers were utilised in the included studies. Three studies only used one symptom checker16,17,21, while two studies used more than 20 symptom checkers1,18. Of note, the WebMD symptom checker was assessed eight times and was the most commonly assessed symptom checker in this review 1,15,17,18,20–23. Diagnostic accuracy Nine studies evaluated symptom checker diagnostic accuracy (Table 2). Overall primary diagnostic accuracy (i.e., listing the correct diagnosis ﬁrst) was low in all studies, ranging from 19 to 38% (Fig. 3)15,16. Top three diagnostic accuracy, measured in seven studies, ranged from 33 to 58% 16,21. Diagnostic accuracy for each speciﬁc symptom checker can be found in Supplementary Table 1. Triage accuracy Six studies examined the accuracy of symptom checkers in providing correct triage advice (Table 2). Overall triage accuracy tended to be higher than diagnostic accuracy, ranging from 49 to 90% (Fig. 4)18,22,23. Three studies strati ﬁed ﬁndings by emergency and non-emergency cases. Two studies reported that emergency cases were triaged more accurately (mean percentage [95% CI]) than non-urgent cases (80% [75 –86] versus 55% [47 –63], and 63% [52–71] versus 30% [11 –39], respectively) 1,18. However, another study demonstrated that the accuracy of triage advice for ophthalmic emergencies was signi ﬁcantly lower than in nonurgent conditions (39% [14 –64] versus 88% [73 –100])17. Triage accuracy for each speci ﬁc symptom checker can be found in Supplementary Table 2. Fig. 1 Preferred reporting items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) ﬂow diagram showing the process of study selection for this systematic review of symptom checker diagnostic and triage accuracy. W. Wallace et al. 2 npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital 1234567890():,; Variation in accuracy All ﬁve studies that reported >1 symptom checker demonstrated marked variability in diagnostic accuracy among different symptom checkers for the same patient vignettes 1,18,20,22,23. For a standardised set of general medical vignettes, mean primary diagnostic accuracy ranged from 5 to 50% 1. Accuracy for diagnosing primary care conditions ranged from 18 to 48% 23. Correct diagnosis of infectious diseases ranged from 3 to 16% 22. Finally, primary diagnostic accuracy of different symptom checkers assessing orofacial conditions ranged from 0 to 38.5% 20. Similarly, the accuracy of triage advice given by individual symptom checkers varied within a study. Semigran et al. and Hill et al. found a range of 33 to 78% and 17 to 61%, respectively, for general medical condtions 1,18. Gilbert et al. reported a mean triage accuracy range of 80 –97% for 200 primary care vignettes 23. Variations in accuracy of providing diagnoses and triage advice were also apparent for speci ﬁc symptom checkers examining different conditions. The WebMD symptom checker was most frequently used and was assessed in eight studies. The primary diagnostic accuracy of WebMD ranged from 3 to 53% across a variety of medical conditions that were assessed in eight included studies (Table 3)1,22. DISCUSSION This systematic review evaluated the diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers for a variety of medical conditions using both simulated and real-life patient vignettes. Our review highlighted that both diagnostic and triage accuracies were generally low. Moreover, there is considerable variation across symptom checkers despite being presented with uniform symptom parameters. We also note that the diagnostic and triage accuracies of symptom checkers, as well as the variation in performance, were greatly dependent on the acuity of the condition assessed. As a whole, these issues raise multiple concerns about the use of symptom checkers as patient-facing tools, especially given their increasingly endorsed role within health systems as triage services that direct patients towards appropriate treatment pathways. It can be argued that the accuracy of triage advice given by symptom checkers is of greater importance compared to diagnostic accuracy, especially considering the increasing role of symptom checkers as triage services that direct users towards appropriate treatment. This is signi ﬁcant for acute and lifethreatening conditions, where the ability of a symptom checker to classify between the need to seek urgent medical attention versus non-urgent medical attention is particularly important. Moreover, as attaining an accurate diagnosis of certain pathologies (e.g., HIV, autoimmune conditions, malignancies) by clinicians would typically involve further biochemical or radiological investigation; it would be arguably unrealistic to expect symptom checkers to be accurate in their diagnosis of the full spectrum of medical conditions. Thus, the onus on symptom checkers should be placed on triage advice accuracy, rather than accurate diagnosis, to ensure users are signposted towards appropriate healthcare pathways. However, when unsafe triage advice is paired with an incorrect set of differential diagnoses, this alignment of errors increases the likelihood of clinical harm to patients, not unlike the Swiss-Cheese model that is cited in aviation safety reports 24. For example, in the UK, Babylon, an NHS-backed symptom checker, has been alleged to suggest that a breast lump may not necessarily represent cancer and it has also been reported to have misinterpreted myocardial infarctions as panic attacks 11,12. While there will be instances where probability-based clinical decision-making tools are incorrect, a safetyﬁrst approach needs to be employed for speciﬁc high-risk conditions, particularly when processing low-risk symptoms that may mask or mimic more life-threatening problems. Variability in accuracy is a concerning recurrent theme in the included studies and indicates that patients are provided with heterogeneous advice, dependent on the symptom checker used and the condition assessed, which results in a spectrum of issues. There is a caveat that such variability is demonstrated through values that are based on different vignettes, time-points, and research teams, all of which introduce confounding factors that require accounting for in future work. However, despite this, variability combined with poor diagnostic and triage accuracy presents a multidimensional system of potential patient harm. Although ‘undertriaging’ has clearly appreciable deleterious effects on patient wellbeing, it is worth noting that ‘overtriaging’ manifests in inappropriate health resource utilisation through unnecessary presentation to emergency services. Even if this does not impact the health of the primary symptom checker user, it does confer a knock-on opportunity cost that is shouldered by those truly in need of emergency services and are left waiting for medical attention. Although the impact of variable triaging advice from symptom checkers has yet to be robustly researched, the highly varied accuracy between symptom checkers noted in this review suggests that there is considerable scope for discrepancies in quality and health outcomes. Fig. 2 Risk of bias summary using QUADAS-2 risk assessment tool44. Authors’ judgement regarding each domain of bias of each study synthesised on the accuracy of symptom checkers. Risk was categorised into one of three categories: low risk ( +), unclear risk (?) and high risk ( −). The table shows possible items to consider in future work involving symptom checkers to achieve a low risk of bias or applicability concerns. W. Wallace et al. 3 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Table 1. Characteristics of the ten studies included in the systematic review on the diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers. First author (year) Study design Participants Intervention Symptom checker(s) used Comparator Outcome measures Hageman (2015)21 Prospective crosssectional study 86 hand clinic patients Outpatients prospectively input data and symptoms into symptom checker to guess diagnosis WebMD Diagnosis from a hand surgeon Diagnostic accuracy (top 3) Semigran (2015)1 Vignette crosssectional study 45 standardised vignettes: 15 emergency 15 non-emergency 15 self-care Patient data and symptoms from various cases input into 23 symptom checkers Ask MD, BetterMedicine. DocResponse, Doctor Diagnose, Drugs.com, EarlyDoc, Esagil, Family Doctor, FreeMD, HMS Family Health Guide, Healthline, Healthwise, Healthy Children, Isabel, iTriage, Mayo Clinic, MEDoctor, NHS Symptom Checkers, Steps2Care, Symcat, Symptify, Symptomate, WebMD True diagnosis and appropriate triage advice Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3 and top 20 results) Triage accuracy (overall, emergency, non-emergency, self-care) Powley (2016) 15 Prospective crosssectional study 34 in ﬂammatory arthritis patients Patients completed NHS and WebMD symptom checkers with their presenting symptoms NHS Choices, WebMD Diagnosis from secondary care Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 5) Berry (2019) 22 Retrospective crosssectional study ED records of 168 HIV/ hepatitis C patients Retrospective input of patient data into symptom checkers Mayo Clinic, WebMD, Symptomate, Symcat, Isabel Emergency department physician determined diagnosis Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3 and top 10) Triage accuracy Nazario Arancibia (2019)16 Prospective crosssectional study 214 low-priority ED patients Patients interviewed using questions from symptom checker to produce differentials Mediktor Emergency department diagnosis Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3, top 5, and top 10) Shen (2019) 17 Vignette crosssectional study 42 vignettes of ophthalmic conditions Cases inputted into symptom checker to record results WebMD True diagnosis and appropriate triage advice Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis and top 3).