10 that provide both. True diagnosis and appropriate triage advice Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3 and top 10) Triage accuracy (emergency, non-emergency, self-care) Yu (2020)19 Retrospective crosssectional study 100 ED patient records Retrospectively using patient records to input information into symptom checkers Drugs.com FamilyDoctor Given ED triage level Triage accuracy Yoshida (2021)20 Vignette crosssectional study 27 vignettes of orofacial pain conditions Vignettes of varied orofacial conditions input into symptom checkers Esagil, FreeMD, Healthline, Isabel, Mayo Clinic, MEDoctor, Symcat, Symptify, Symptomate, WebMD, ADA True diagnosis by resident in orofacial pain and oral medicine Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 4) W. Wallace et al. 4 npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital Table 2. Overall and range of average diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers in each study. First author (year) No. of symptom checkers Overall average diagnostic accuracy (%) Range of average diagnostic accuracy (%) Average triage accuracy (%) Range of average triage accuracy (%) Hageman (2015) 21 1 33 n/a ns n/a Semigran (2015) 1 23 34 5 – 50 57 33 – 78 Powley (2016) 15 1 19 n/a ns n/a Berry (2019) 22 5n s 3 – 16.4 48.8 ns Nazario Arancibia (2019)16 1 37.9 n/a ns n/a Shen (2019) 17 1 26 n/a 66.7 n/a Gilbert (2020) 23 8 26.1 18 – 48 90.1 80 – 97.8 Hill (2020) 18 36 36 12 – 61 49 17 – 61 Yu (2020)19 2n s n s 6 2 5 0 – 74 Yoshida (2021)20 11 21.7 0 – 38.5 ns ns n/a not applicable as only one symptom checker was used, ns not stated. Fig. 3 Mean primary diagnostic accuracy of symptom checkers in each study. Error bars signify the range of accuracy of different symptom checkers for the same patient/vignette population. An overall accuracy value was not given in Berry (2019). Fig. 4 Mean accuracy of triage information given by symptom checkers in each study. Error bars signify the range of accuracy of different symptom checkers for the same patient/vignette population. W. Wallace et al. 5 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Many cite the poor transparency and reporting of both symptom checker development and subsequent clinical validation as issues that severely limit the extent to which these technologies can be meaningfully endorsed for population-wide use within health systems. Minimal evidence is provided regarding the context, patient demographics and clinical information that is used to create symptom checkers. Case coverage (i.e., what conditions and patient populations are accounted for by the software) must be explained, especially since symptom checkers may not account for geographical or country-speci ﬁc variations in disease prevalence, thus impacting generalisability and potential utility. Moreover, symptom checkers are not explainable in how they arrive to their recommendations. A focus on explainability would signi ﬁcantly increase the ability to effectively audit these devices as well as increase trust from both patients and healthcare professionals in the outputs they provide. Overall trust is also hindered by claims of several symptom checkers to purported house ‘AI algorithms ’as part of their diagnostic process, despite not providing any convincing evidence for this, again re ﬂecting the poor transparency and reporting of the symptom checker development and validation process. In their current guise, symptom checkers are at best considered as an adjunctive technology which may direct patients towards various services with an appropriate level of urgency and reduce the burden placed on EDs and primary care services. This is especially relevant in areas where access to traditional assessment models may be scarce. However, our study has highlighted several safety and regulatory concerns in their potential use, particularly around variation between different symptom checkers and the conditions being assessed. Study limitations First, ﬁve of the included studies used simulated patient vignettes, which are unlikely to represent the complexity of real patients 25–27. Future work could include real-life patient data to increase software exposure to the nuances of real-life patient populations. Second, bias is inevitable in retrospective studies, since much of the data being inputted rely on accurate documentation of patient details, their symptoms, and outcomes afterwards. Third, the observed variation between symptom checkers may be partly attributable to study heterogeneity, including the medical conditions studied, their context, and the way symptom details are inputted into the symptom checker (sequence, level of certainty and agreement). Fourth, several studies have suggested that diagnostic accuracy of symptom checkers may improve over time given increased exposure to data upon which an AI-centred model may iterate. This can lead to variance in performance that is hard to account for in a cross-sectional study. Fifth, this review did not capture all existing online symptom checkers. The internet is abundant with symptom checkers and although the majority do not have any validatory reports, newer and more improved symptom checkers to those studied may be available. Finally, our study synthesises data and ﬁndings from high-income countries given the paucity of data from middle and low-economically developed countries, which may exhibit different health-seeking behaviours, digital literacy rates, and disease burdens. Recommendations For regulatory organisations . A reassessment of how symptom checkers are regulated is required so that the class of these devices better re ﬂect the clinical function and associated risk that these systems serve in the real world as a public-facing source of medical advice 10,28. Currently, global regulatory authorities, such as The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, the regulatory body responsible for medicines and medical devices in the UK, perceive symptom checkers to be low-risk medical devices29. As such, these systems are only subject to selfcertiﬁcation prior to entering the open market. As highlighted by our results, there is a considerable clinical risk that can be associated with the use of these systems. Despite disclaimers, these systems clearly provide end-users with different diagnoses and behavioural recommendations. Symptom checkers, including testing and validation data and other premarket submissions, should be scrutinised and approved through regulatory body review, aided by independent experts; akin to the process that is required for Software as Medical Devices approval from the FDA 30. Greater regulatory scrutiny must centre around clear reporting of diagnostic performance, the datasets used to train and validate the systems as well as the clinical context in which evaluations were undertaken. Viewing these systems as a higher class of medical devices would also allow mandate greater post-market surveillance scrutiny, which will supersede the current status quo of anecdotal reports through media sources. For developers of symptom checkers . Robust clinical validation and testing is warranted to improve current software trustworthiness and reliability. The responsibility of this process lies with companies that develop such technologies; a process that is akin to how pharmaceutical companies are expected to provide data supporting the ef ﬁcacy and safety of drugs to regulators. The development of symptom checkers should ideally incorporate real-world patient data. Within their product life cycle, digital health technologies, particularly those which are AI-centred, typically go through a training phase, a validation phase, and a test phase. Within a training phase, a model (e.g., a symptom checker) learns a particular task (e.g., to identify or triage Table 3. Primary diagnostic accuracy of WebMD in included studies. First author (year) Participants WebMD primary diagnostic accuracy (%) Hageman (2015) 21 86 hand clinic patients 33 Semigran (2015) 1 45 standardised vignettes: 36 15 emergency 15 non-emergency 15 self-care Powley (2016) 15 34 in ﬂammatory arthritis patients 19 Berry (2019) 22 ED records of 168 HIV/hepatitis C patients 3 (Hep C), 7.8 (HIV), 7.1 (both) Shen (2019) 17 42 vignettes of ophthalmic conditions 26 Gilbert (2020) 23 200 primary care vignettes 21 Hill (2020) 18 48 vignettes with ‘Australia-speciﬁc conditions ’ 53 Yoshida (2021)20 27 vignettes of orofacial pain conditions 30.77 W. Wallace et al. 6 npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital diagnoses) using a particular dataset (e.g., real or simulated examples of a particular clinical presentation). During the validation phase, further data is used to provide an unbiased evaluation of model accuracy, which allows developers to ﬁne tune aspects of the model prior to committing to a ﬁnal version. A test phase uses data that the model has not encountered before (e.g., new clinical data) in order to evaluate overall performance (e.g., diagnostic or triage accuracy). For a number of reasons, including ﬁnancial and ease of access, some developers rely upon simulated vignettes or synthetic data in order to provide the data required for the aforementioned phases. While vignettes or synthetic data with typical disease patterns and standardised presentations may be viewed as a viable and accessible means of training a symptom checker, this may not negate the need for testing using real-world cases 27. Clinical vignettes are inherently limited in their utility to assess the diagnostic accuracy or triage safety of symptom checkers. Realworld evidence studies involving real patients have been recommended to examine the performance of symptom checkers against clinicians 27. The importance of using real-world data within digital health technology development is also strongly supported by regulatory authorities, as evidenced by the introduction of the ‘Real World Evidence ’ program by the FDA, which have also approved databases with real-world patient data to support this initiative 31–33. Obtaining a representative and balanced patient vignette set is especially pertinent for the training of symptom checkers and development of AI algorithms. The lack of quality training data and the presence of dataset imbalances will likely directly inﬂuence the diagnostic model and will negatively impact diagnostic and triage accuracy 34. Building upon this, developers should use a wide and representative range of cases that encompass typical and atypical disease presentations; various demographic fractions (age, gender, and ethnicity) as well as medical comorbidities. These cases, which are collated in the form of datasets, should adhere to emerging guidance as to what constitutes transparent and complete reporting.