REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN The diagnostic and triage accuracy of digital and online symptom checker tools: a systematic review William Wallace 1,5, Calvin Chan 1,5, Swathikan Chidambaram 1, Lydia Hanna 1, Fahad Mujtaba Iqbal 1,2, Amish Acharya 1,2, Pasha Normahani 1, Hutan Ashra ﬁan2, Sheraz R. Markar 1,3,4, Viknesh Sounderajah 2 ✉ and Ara Darzi 1,2 Digital and online symptom checkers are an increasingly adopted class of health technologies that enable patients to input their symptoms and biodata to produce a set of likely diagnoses and associated triage advice. However, concerns regarding the accuracy and safety of these symptom checkers have been raised. This systematic review evaluates the accuracy of symptom checkers in providing diagnoses and appropriate triage advice. MEDLINE and Web of Science were searched for studies that used either real or simulated patients to evaluate online or digital symptom checkers. The primary outcomes were the diagnostic and triage accuracy of the symptom checkers. The QUADAS-2 tool was used to assess study quality. Of the 177 studies retrieved, 10 studies met the inclusion criteria. Researchers evaluated the accuracy of symptom checkers using a variety of medical conditions, including ophthalmological conditions, in ﬂammatory arthritides and HIV. A total of 50% of the studies recruited real patients, while the remainder used simulated cases. The diagnostic accuracy of the primary diagnosis was low across included studies (range: 19–37.9%) and varied between individual symptom checkers, despite consistent symptom data input. Triage accuracy (range: 48.8–90.1%) was typically higher than diagnostic accuracy. Overall, the diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers are variable and of low accuracy. Given the increasing push towards adopting this class of technologies across numerous health systems, this study demonstrates that reliance upon symptom checkers could pose signi ﬁcant patient safety hazards. Large-scale primary studies, based upon real-world data, are warranted to demonstrate the adequate performance of these technologies in a manner that is non-inferior to current best practices. Moreover, an urgent assessment of how these systems are regulated and implemented is required. npj Digital Medicine (2022) 5:118 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-022-00667-w INTRODUCTION Digital and online symptom checkers are application or software tools that enable patients to input their symptoms and biodata to produce a set of differential diagnoses and clinical triage advice. The diagnostic function of symptom checkers is to provide a list of differential diagnoses, ranked by likelihood 1. The triage function highlights to end-users the most appropriate course of action regarding their potential diagnosis, which typically includes seeking urgent care; contacting their general practitioner; or self-care. Symptom checkers have become an increasingly prominent feature of the modern healthcare landscape due to increasing access to internet connectivity and a cultural shift towards more involved self-care engagement 2. In 2020, 96% of UK households had internet access, of which over one-third of adults used the internet to self-diagnose health-related issues 2,3.