reported a mean triage accuracy range of 80 –97% for 200 primary care vignettes 23. Variations in accuracy of providing diagnoses and triage advice were also apparent for speci ﬁc symptom checkers examining different conditions. The WebMD symptom checker was most frequently used and was assessed in eight studies. The primary diagnostic accuracy of WebMD ranged from 3 to 53% across a variety of medical conditions that were assessed in eight included studies (Table 3)1,22. DISCUSSION This systematic review evaluated the diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers for a variety of medical conditions using both simulated and real-life patient vignettes. Our review highlighted that both diagnostic and triage accuracies were generally low. Moreover, there is considerable variation across symptom checkers despite being presented with uniform symptom parameters. We also note that the diagnostic and triage accuracies of symptom checkers, as well as the variation in performance, were greatly dependent on the acuity of the condition assessed. As a whole, these issues raise multiple concerns about the use of symptom checkers as patient-facing tools, especially given their increasingly endorsed role within health systems as triage services that direct patients towards appropriate treatment pathways. It can be argued that the accuracy of triage advice given by symptom checkers is of greater importance compared to diagnostic accuracy, especially considering the increasing role of symptom checkers as triage services that direct users towards appropriate treatment. This is signi ﬁcant for acute and lifethreatening conditions, where the ability of a symptom checker to classify between the need to seek urgent medical attention versus non-urgent medical attention is particularly important. Moreover, as attaining an accurate diagnosis of certain pathologies (e.g., HIV, autoimmune conditions, malignancies) by clinicians would typically involve further biochemical or radiological investigation; it would be arguably unrealistic to expect symptom checkers to be accurate in their diagnosis of the full spectrum of medical conditions. Thus, the onus on symptom checkers should be placed on triage advice accuracy, rather than accurate diagnosis, to ensure users are signposted towards appropriate healthcare pathways. However, when unsafe triage advice is paired with an incorrect set of differential diagnoses, this alignment of errors increases the likelihood of clinical harm to patients, not unlike the Swiss-Cheese model that is cited in aviation safety reports 24. For example, in the UK, Babylon, an NHS-backed symptom checker, has been alleged to suggest that a breast lump may not necessarily represent cancer and it has also been reported to have misinterpreted myocardial infarctions as panic attacks 11,12. While there will be instances where probability-based clinical decision-making tools are incorrect, a safetyﬁrst approach needs to be employed for speciﬁc high-risk conditions, particularly when processing low-risk symptoms that may mask or mimic more life-threatening problems. Variability in accuracy is a concerning recurrent theme in the included studies and indicates that patients are provided with heterogeneous advice, dependent on the symptom checker used and the condition assessed, which results in a spectrum of issues. There is a caveat that such variability is demonstrated through values that are based on different vignettes, time-points, and research teams, all of which introduce confounding factors that require accounting for in future work. However, despite this, variability combined with poor diagnostic and triage accuracy presents a multidimensional system of potential patient harm. Although ‘undertriaging’ has clearly appreciable deleterious effects on patient wellbeing, it is worth noting that ‘overtriaging’ manifests in inappropriate health resource utilisation through unnecessary presentation to emergency services. Even if this does not impact the health of the primary symptom checker user, it does confer a knock-on opportunity cost that is shouldered by those truly in need of emergency services and are left waiting for medical attention. Although the impact of variable triaging advice from symptom checkers has yet to be robustly researched, the highly varied accuracy between symptom checkers noted in this review suggests that there is considerable scope for discrepancies in quality and health outcomes. Fig. 2 Risk of bias summary using QUADAS-2 risk assessment tool44. Authors’ judgement regarding each domain of bias of each study synthesised on the accuracy of symptom checkers. Risk was categorised into one of three categories: low risk ( +), unclear risk (?) and high risk ( −). The table shows possible items to consider in future work involving symptom checkers to achieve a low risk of bias or applicability concerns. W. Wallace et al. 3 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Table 1. Characteristics of the ten studies included in the systematic review on the diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers. First author (year) Study design Participants Intervention Symptom checker(s) used Comparator Outcome measures Hageman (2015)21 Prospective crosssectional study 86 hand clinic patients Outpatients prospectively input data and symptoms into symptom checker to guess diagnosis WebMD Diagnosis from a hand surgeon Diagnostic accuracy (top 3) Semigran (2015)1 Vignette crosssectional study 45 standardised vignettes: 15 emergency 15 non-emergency 15 self-care Patient data and symptoms from various cases input into 23 symptom checkers Ask MD, BetterMedicine. DocResponse, Doctor Diagnose, Drugs.com, EarlyDoc, Esagil, Family Doctor, FreeMD, HMS Family Health Guide, Healthline, Healthwise, Healthy Children, Isabel, iTriage, Mayo Clinic, MEDoctor, NHS Symptom Checkers, Steps2Care, Symcat, Symptify, Symptomate, WebMD True diagnosis and appropriate triage advice Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3 and top 20 results) Triage accuracy (overall, emergency, non-emergency, self-care) Powley (2016) 15 Prospective crosssectional study 34 in ﬂammatory arthritis patients Patients completed NHS and WebMD symptom checkers with their presenting symptoms NHS Choices, WebMD Diagnosis from secondary care Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 5) Berry (2019) 22 Retrospective crosssectional study ED records of 168 HIV/ hepatitis C patients Retrospective input of patient data into symptom checkers Mayo Clinic, WebMD, Symptomate, Symcat, Isabel Emergency department physician determined diagnosis Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3 and top 10) Triage accuracy Nazario Arancibia (2019)16 Prospective crosssectional study 214 low-priority ED patients Patients interviewed using questions from symptom checker to produce differentials Mediktor Emergency department diagnosis Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3, top 5, and top 10) Shen (2019) 17 Vignette crosssectional study 42 vignettes of ophthalmic conditions Cases inputted into symptom checker to record results WebMD True diagnosis and appropriate triage advice Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis and top 3). Triage accuracy (emergency, nonemergency) Gilbert (2020) 23 Vignette crosssectional study 200 primary care vignettes Vignettes used to input into symptom checkers and to assess general practitioners (GPs) ADA, Babylon, Buoy, K health, Mediktor, Symptomate, WebMD, YourMD True diagnosis and GPs Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3 and top 5) Triage accuracy Hill (2020) 18 Vignette crosssectional study 48 vignettes with ‘Australia-speciﬁc conditions’ Vignettes summarised and entered in symptom checkers 36 symptom checkers, 17 diagnostic only, 9 triage only advice. 10 that provide both. True diagnosis and appropriate triage advice Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 3 and top 10) Triage accuracy (emergency, non-emergency, self-care) Yu (2020)19 Retrospective crosssectional study 100 ED patient records Retrospectively using patient records to input information into symptom checkers Drugs.com FamilyDoctor Given ED triage level Triage accuracy Yoshida (2021)20 Vignette crosssectional study 27 vignettes of orofacial pain conditions Vignettes of varied orofacial conditions input into symptom checkers Esagil, FreeMD, Healthline, Isabel, Mayo Clinic, MEDoctor, Symcat, Symptify, Symptomate, WebMD, ADA True diagnosis by resident in orofacial pain and oral medicine Diagnostic accuracy (primary diagnosis, top 4) W. Wallace et al. 4 npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital Table 2. Overall and range of average diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers in each study. First author (year) No. of symptom checkers Overall average diagnostic accuracy (%) Range of average diagnostic accuracy (%) Average triage accuracy (%) Range of average triage accuracy (%) Hageman (2015) 21 1 33 n/a ns n/a Semigran (2015) 1 23 34 5 – 50 57 33 – 78 Powley (2016) 15 1 19 n/a ns n/a Berry (2019) 22 5n s 3 – 16.4 48.8 ns Nazario Arancibia (2019)16 1 37.9 n/a ns n/a Shen (2019) 17 1 26 n/a 66.7 n/a Gilbert (2020) 23 8 26.1 18 – 48 90.1 80 – 97.8 Hill (2020) 18 36 36 12 – 61 49 17 – 61 Yu (2020)19 2n s n s 6 2 5 0 – 74 Yoshida (2021)20 11 21.7 0 – 38.5 ns ns n/a not applicable as only one symptom checker was used, ns not stated. Fig. 3 Mean primary diagnostic accuracy of symptom checkers in each study. Error bars signify the range of accuracy of different symptom checkers for the same patient/vignette population. An overall accuracy value was not given in Berry (2019). Fig. 4 Mean accuracy of triage information given by symptom checkers in each study. Error bars signify the range of accuracy of different symptom checkers for the same patient/vignette population. W. Wallace et al. 5 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Many cite the poor transparency and reporting of both symptom checker development and subsequent clinical validation as issues that severely limit the extent to which these technologies can be meaningfully endorsed for population-wide use within health systems. Minimal evidence is provided regarding the context, patient demographics and clinical information that is used to create symptom checkers. Case coverage (i.e., what conditions and patient populations are accounted for by the software) must be explained, especially since symptom checkers may not account for geographical or country-speci ﬁc variations in disease prevalence, thus impacting generalisability and potential utility. Moreover, symptom checkers are not explainable in how they arrive to their recommendations. A focus on explainability would signi ﬁcantly increase the ability to effectively audit these devices as well as increase trust from both patients and healthcare professionals in the outputs they provide. Overall trust is also hindered by claims of several symptom checkers to purported house ‘AI algorithms ’as part of their diagnostic process, despite not providing any convincing evidence for this, again re ﬂecting the poor transparency and reporting of the symptom checker development and validation process. In their current guise, symptom checkers are at best considered as an adjunctive technology which may direct patients towards various services with an appropriate level of urgency and reduce the burden placed on EDs and primary care services. This is especially relevant in areas where access to traditional assessment models may be scarce. However, our study has highlighted several safety and regulatory concerns in their potential use, particularly around variation between different symptom checkers and the conditions being assessed. Study limitations First, ﬁve of the included studies used simulated patient vignettes, which are unlikely to represent the complexity of real patients 25–27. Future work could include real-life patient data to increase software exposure to the nuances of real-life patient populations. Second, bias is inevitable in retrospective studies, since much of the data being inputted rely on accurate documentation of patient details, their symptoms, and outcomes afterwards. Third, the observed variation between symptom checkers may be partly attributable to study heterogeneity, including the medical conditions studied, their context, and the way symptom details are inputted into the symptom checker (sequence, level of certainty and agreement). Fourth, several studies have suggested that diagnostic accuracy of symptom checkers may improve over time given increased exposure to data upon which an AI-centred model may iterate. This can lead to variance in performance that is hard to account for in a cross-sectional study. Fifth, this review did not capture all existing online symptom checkers.