REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN The diagnostic and triage accuracy of digital and online symptom checker tools: a systematic review William Wallace 1,5, Calvin Chan 1,5, Swathikan Chidambaram 1, Lydia Hanna 1, Fahad Mujtaba Iqbal 1,2, Amish Acharya 1,2, Pasha Normahani 1, Hutan Ashra ﬁan2, Sheraz R. Markar 1,3,4, Viknesh Sounderajah 2 ✉ and Ara Darzi 1,2 Digital and online symptom checkers are an increasingly adopted class of health technologies that enable patients to input their symptoms and biodata to produce a set of likely diagnoses and associated triage advice. However, concerns regarding the accuracy and safety of these symptom checkers have been raised. This systematic review evaluates the accuracy of symptom checkers in providing diagnoses and appropriate triage advice. MEDLINE and Web of Science were searched for studies that used either real or simulated patients to evaluate online or digital symptom checkers. The primary outcomes were the diagnostic and triage accuracy of the symptom checkers. The QUADAS-2 tool was used to assess study quality. Of the 177 studies retrieved, 10 studies met the inclusion criteria. Researchers evaluated the accuracy of symptom checkers using a variety of medical conditions, including ophthalmological conditions, in ﬂammatory arthritides and HIV. A total of 50% of the studies recruited real patients, while the remainder used simulated cases. The diagnostic accuracy of the primary diagnosis was low across included studies (range: 19–37.9%) and varied between individual symptom checkers, despite consistent symptom data input. Triage accuracy (range: 48.8–90.1%) was typically higher than diagnostic accuracy. Overall, the diagnostic and triage accuracy of symptom checkers are variable and of low accuracy. Given the increasing push towards adopting this class of technologies across numerous health systems, this study demonstrates that reliance upon symptom checkers could pose signi ﬁcant patient safety hazards. Large-scale primary studies, based upon real-world data, are warranted to demonstrate the adequate performance of these technologies in a manner that is non-inferior to current best practices. Moreover, an urgent assessment of how these systems are regulated and implemented is required. npj Digital Medicine (2022) 5:118 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-022-00667-w INTRODUCTION Digital and online symptom checkers are application or software tools that enable patients to input their symptoms and biodata to produce a set of differential diagnoses and clinical triage advice. The diagnostic function of symptom checkers is to provide a list of differential diagnoses, ranked by likelihood 1. The triage function highlights to end-users the most appropriate course of action regarding their potential diagnosis, which typically includes seeking urgent care; contacting their general practitioner; or self-care. Symptom checkers have become an increasingly prominent feature of the modern healthcare landscape due to increasing access to internet connectivity and a cultural shift towards more involved self-care engagement 2. In 2020, 96% of UK households had internet access, of which over one-third of adults used the internet to self-diagnose health-related issues 2,3. Governments have also incorporated symptom checkers into their formal health and social care pathways in order to alleviate the increasing burden that is placed upon both primary care services and emergency services, particularly in light of the COVID19 pandemic 4–6. In 2017, the NHS 111 triage service, backed by Babylon, reported over 15,500 app downloads and was responsible for over 9700 triages 7. In 2021, Babylon reportedly covered 4.3 million people worldwide, performing over 1.2 million digital consultations with 4000 clinical consultations each day, with one patient interaction every 10 s. It has been previously estimated that 12% of emergency department (ED) attendances would be more appropriately managed at other sites of care 8,9. Hence, symptom checkers have the potential to reduce the ﬁnancial and resource burden placed upon hospitals and can help focus resources towards those who are truly in medical need. Public and private companies have advertised symptom checkers to be a cost-effective solution that may serve as a ﬁrst port-of-call for patients and effectively signpost patients to the most appropriate healthcare service. When used appropriately, symptom checkers can advise patients with serious conditions to seek urgent attention and conversely prevent those with problems best resolved through self-care from unnecessarily seeking medical attention 1. However, for all of the potential health, organisational and ﬁnancial bene ﬁts, symptom checkers are heavily dependent on the accuracy of diagnostic and triage advice that they provide. Overtriaging those with non-urgent ailments will exacerbate the unnecessary use of healthcare services. Conversely and more seriously, inaccuracies in diagnosing and triaging patients with life-threatening conditions could result in preventable morbidity and mortality 1,10. In fact, symptom checkers have previously received heavy media criticism for not correctly diagnosing cancer, cardiac conditions, and providing differing advice to patients with the same symptomatology but different demographic characteristics 11–13. These alleged reports raise concerns around the possibility that these systems may deliver unequitable clinical performance across different gender and 1Department of Surgery & Cancer, Imperial College London, St. Mary ’s Hospital, London W2 1NY, UK. 2Institute of Global Health Innovation, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK. 3Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. 4Nufﬁeld Department of Surgery, Churchill Hospital, University of Oxford, OX3 7LE Oxford, UK. 5These authors contributed equally: William Wallace, Calvin Chan. ✉email: vs1108@imperial.ac.uk www.nature.com/npjdigitalmed Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital 1234567890():,; sociodemographic groups. In a previous systematic review, Chambers et al. (2019) assessed symptom checkers on their safety and ability to correctly diagnose and distinguish between high and low acuity conditions 14. The diagnostic accuracy was found to be variable between different platforms and was generally low. Given the rapid expansion in commercially available digital and online symptom checkers, a more updated review is warranted to determine if this is still the case.