Finally, our study synthesises data and ﬁndings from high-income countries given the paucity of data from middle and low-economically developed countries, which may exhibit different health-seeking behaviours, digital literacy rates, and disease burdens. Recommendations For regulatory organisations . A reassessment of how symptom checkers are regulated is required so that the class of these devices better re ﬂect the clinical function and associated risk that these systems serve in the real world as a public-facing source of medical advice 10,28. Currently, global regulatory authorities, such as The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, the regulatory body responsible for medicines and medical devices in the UK, perceive symptom checkers to be low-risk medical devices29. As such, these systems are only subject to selfcertiﬁcation prior to entering the open market. As highlighted by our results, there is a considerable clinical risk that can be associated with the use of these systems. Despite disclaimers, these systems clearly provide end-users with different diagnoses and behavioural recommendations. Symptom checkers, including testing and validation data and other premarket submissions, should be scrutinised and approved through regulatory body review, aided by independent experts; akin to the process that is required for Software as Medical Devices approval from the FDA 30. Greater regulatory scrutiny must centre around clear reporting of diagnostic performance, the datasets used to train and validate the systems as well as the clinical context in which evaluations were undertaken. Viewing these systems as a higher class of medical devices would also allow mandate greater post-market surveillance scrutiny, which will supersede the current status quo of anecdotal reports through media sources. For developers of symptom checkers . Robust clinical validation and testing is warranted to improve current software trustworthiness and reliability. The responsibility of this process lies with companies that develop such technologies; a process that is akin to how pharmaceutical companies are expected to provide data supporting the ef ﬁcacy and safety of drugs to regulators. The development of symptom checkers should ideally incorporate real-world patient data. Within their product life cycle, digital health technologies, particularly those which are AI-centred, typically go through a training phase, a validation phase, and a test phase. Within a training phase, a model (e.g., a symptom checker) learns a particular task (e.g., to identify or triage Table 3. Primary diagnostic accuracy of WebMD in included studies. First author (year) Participants WebMD primary diagnostic accuracy (%) Hageman (2015) 21 86 hand clinic patients 33 Semigran (2015) 1 45 standardised vignettes: 36 15 emergency 15 non-emergency 15 self-care Powley (2016) 15 34 in ﬂammatory arthritis patients 19 Berry (2019) 22 ED records of 168 HIV/hepatitis C patients 3 (Hep C), 7.8 (HIV), 7.1 (both) Shen (2019) 17 42 vignettes of ophthalmic conditions 26 Gilbert (2020) 23 200 primary care vignettes 21 Hill (2020) 18 48 vignettes with ‘Australia-speciﬁc conditions ’ 53 Yoshida (2021)20 27 vignettes of orofacial pain conditions 30.77 W. Wallace et al. 6 npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital diagnoses) using a particular dataset (e.g., real or simulated examples of a particular clinical presentation). During the validation phase, further data is used to provide an unbiased evaluation of model accuracy, which allows developers to ﬁne tune aspects of the model prior to committing to a ﬁnal version. A test phase uses data that the model has not encountered before (e.g., new clinical data) in order to evaluate overall performance (e.g., diagnostic or triage accuracy). For a number of reasons, including ﬁnancial and ease of access, some developers rely upon simulated vignettes or synthetic data in order to provide the data required for the aforementioned phases. While vignettes or synthetic data with typical disease patterns and standardised presentations may be viewed as a viable and accessible means of training a symptom checker, this may not negate the need for testing using real-world cases 27. Clinical vignettes are inherently limited in their utility to assess the diagnostic accuracy or triage safety of symptom checkers. Realworld evidence studies involving real patients have been recommended to examine the performance of symptom checkers against clinicians 27. The importance of using real-world data within digital health technology development is also strongly supported by regulatory authorities, as evidenced by the introduction of the ‘Real World Evidence ’ program by the FDA, which have also approved databases with real-world patient data to support this initiative 31–33. Obtaining a representative and balanced patient vignette set is especially pertinent for the training of symptom checkers and development of AI algorithms. The lack of quality training data and the presence of dataset imbalances will likely directly inﬂuence the diagnostic model and will negatively impact diagnostic and triage accuracy 34. Building upon this, developers should use a wide and representative range of cases that encompass typical and atypical disease presentations; various demographic fractions (age, gender, and ethnicity) as well as medical comorbidities. These cases, which are collated in the form of datasets, should adhere to emerging guidance as to what constitutes transparent and complete reporting. Derived from the seminal ‘Datasheets for Datasets ’ effort, the recent ‘Healthsheet’ initiative has set forth healthcare-speci ﬁc standards around the reporting of dataset transparency and diversity 35,36. This initiative has also been endorsed by the ongoing STANDING Together project, which will further serve to provide guidance around minimising racial and ethical health inequalities in AI datasets dataset composition 37. These initiatives will prove crucial to regulators, commissioners, policymakers, and health data institutions who will have greater guidance as to how to assess whether the dataset is diverse and represents all segments of populations, including underserved groups. Conversely, creation of representative patient vignette sets will allow regulators to further validate symptom checkers during the approval process and ‘benchmark’ symptom checker performance. Providing developers access to a proportion of vignettes (i.e., a development dataset) will additionally improve transparency and understanding of cases that symptom checkers are expected to be able to process during the validation process. For healthcare researchers . All the above recommendations offer healthcare researchers many avenues for further work. Within this, it is important that digital health studies that form the basis for symptom checkers are carried out with greater methodological rigour and transparency. First, vignettes used in audit studies examining symptom checker accuracy should be openly accessible. Within this systematic review, except for Semigran et al. and Hill et al., the vignettes that are inputted into symptom checkers are not published as supplementary data in the included studies. Thus, reproducibility and validation of audit study ﬁndings would be greatly aided by publishing the clinical vignettes used. Second, the majority of the included studies involved clinicians, not patients, inputting either clinical vignette details or reported symptoms from patient records into symptom checkers. However, these ‘clinician-vetted’ symptoms may differ from patients ’ characterisation of their own physical symptoms and may therefore produce differing symptom checker results and limit generalisability. One potential avenue for further symptom checker validation could involve prospective data collection (i.e., from outpatient clinics and ED waiting areas) and comparison of results with clinician diagnoses. This approach would also be more representative of the role a symptom checker may play within the patient journey and a valuable method of determining patient attitudes and acceptability of symptom checkers. Third, to our knowledge, continued and persistent longitudinal assessment of symptom checker performance is not currently available in the literature. Several studies have suggested that symptom checkers performance may improve over time given increased exposure to data upon which an AI-centred model may iterate. This is especially pertinent as adaptive AI algorithms (where there is continuous learning from new data and subsequent algorithm modiﬁcation) are incorporated into symptom checkers. Thus, these systems may have variable performance over time, which will require quanti ﬁcation with future longitudinal studies involving benchmarking clinical vignettes and pertinent population subgroup analyses. Fourth, while symptom checkers ful ﬁl the need for telemedicine, further work should also evaluate whether symptom checkers truly are better than more traditional telephone triage lines. Previous work by Semigran et al. directly comparing physician and symptom checker (Human Dx) diagnostic accuracy noted signi ﬁcant outperformance by physicians 38. Furthermore, comparison of symptom checker and search engine performance is needed. Search engines (e.g., Google, Bing, or Yahoo) are often a ﬁrst port-of-call for self-diagnosis, though concerns regarding their use for this purpose have been raised1,39,40. More importantly, there is an unmet need for educating patients about using symptom checkers, especially about their limitations. While the variation in digital health literacy has previously been established, more effort is required to address and correct its socio-economic drivers. Finally, one of the most important questions that have arisen from our review centres around what constitutes acceptable performance within this class of technologies, given that these technologies can be adopted across various clinical pathways and health systems, with differing degrees of clinical oversight. Given the variance in performance that we highlight across studies, it is imperative that the evidence produced by healthcare researchers and used by regulators, national policymakers and commissioners is transparent and complete, particularly around the reporting of reference standards and clinical context, which are key factors required for a health technology assessment. Although previous work has directly compared symptom checker and physician performance38, distinct evidence needs to be generated against speciﬁc clinical pathways and health systems in order to facilitate fair appraisals. These reporting and evidential tenets are upheld by guideline initiatives produced by The EQUATOR Network, such as CONSORT-AI and STARD-AI, which mandate the reporting of such key study characteristics for AI-centred clinical trial and diagnostic test accuracy studies, respectively 41,42. CONCLUSIONS In this systematic review, symptom checkers diagnostic and triage accuracy varied substantially and was generally low. Variation exists between different symptom checkers and the conditions being assessed; this raises safety and regulatory concerns. Given the increasing trend of telemedicine use and, even the endorsement of certain applications by the NHS, further work should seek to re-examine the regulation associated with these technologies W. Wallace et al. 7 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2022) 118 as well as establish datasets to support their development and improve patient safety. METHODS Eligibility criteria This systematic review was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and was registered in the PROSPERO registry (ID: CRD42021271022)43.