Archives of Academic Emergency Medicine. 2022; 10(1): e32 REVIEW ARTICLE Accuracy of Triage Systems in Disasters and Mass Casualty Incidents; a Systematic Review Jafar Bazyar1,2,3, Mehrdad Farrokhi1, Amir Salari4, Hamid Safarpour2,5, Hamid Reza Khankeh1∗ 1. Health in Emergency and Disaster Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 2. Department of Nursing, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Ilam University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Iran. 3. Pre-hospital Medical Emergency organization, Ilam university of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Iran. 4. Department of Health in Emergencies and Disasters, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 5. Non-Communicable Diseases Research Center, Ilam University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Iran. Received: January 2021; Accepted: March 2021; Published online: 30 April 2022 Abstract: Introduction: To prioritize patients to provide them with proper services and also manage the scarce resources in emergencies, the use of triage systems seems to be essential. The aim of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of the existing triage systems in disasters and mass casualty incidents. Methods: The present study is a systematic review of the accuracy of all triage systems worldwide. The results of this study were based on the articles published in English language journals. In this research, all papers published from the beginning of 2000 to the end of 2021 were sought through different databases. Finally, a total of 13 articles was ultimately selected from 89 articles. Results: 13 studies on the accuracy of triage systems were reviewed. The START , mSTART , SALT , Smart, Care Flight, ASAV , MPTT , Sieve and ESI triage systems, had an accuracy, sensitivity, and speciﬁcity of less than 90%. Only the Smart triage system had an overall accuracy of more than 90%. Conclusion: According to the ﬁndings of the current systematic review, the performance of the existing triage systems in terms of accuracy of prioritizing the injured people and other performance indexes is not desirable. Therefore, to improve the performance and increase the precision of triage systems, the world nations are recommended to change or revise the indexes used in triage models and also identify other inﬂuential factors affecting the accuracy of triage systems. Keywords: Disasters; Data Accuracy, Triage; Mass Casualty Incidents; Systematic review Cite this article as: Bazyar J, Farrokhi M, Salari A, Safarpour H, Khankeh HR. Accuracy of Triage Systems in Disasters and Mass Casualty Incidents; a Systematic Review. Arch Acad Emerg Med. 2022; 10(1): e32. https://doi.org/10.22037/aaem.v10i1.1526. 1. Introduction Triage, with a French origin (Trier), means prioritizing and is used to classify patients and people affected by emergencies and disasters. This classiﬁcation leads to better management of services and optimal use of the available resources for injured people and patients (1). A triage system is considered optimal, when it can identify patients and injured individuals who need immediate care and provide access to rapid diagnostic and therapeutic measures (2, 3).