2 applied based on the age group, the cause of damage, the geographical area, and other characteristics of the affected people (1). The most common of which are Simple Triage and Rapid Treatment (START), Modiﬁed Simple Triage Algorithm and Rapid Treatment (mSTART), Sort, Assess, Lifesaving interventions, Treatment/Transport (SALT), SMART , Care Flight, Amberg-Schwandorf Algorithm for Primary Triage (ASAV), Modiﬁed Physiological Triage Tool (MPTT), Sieve, and Emergency Severity Index (ESI) triage systems. These triage systems are increasingly being used to prioritize injured people in emergencies and disasters, as well as in health and medical systems; however, there is no single comprehensive system that is universally agreed upon. Each country or region of the world uses a different system for triage based on its own needs (12-15). In general, there are many controversies in the world concerning the accuracy of the triage systems. Therefore, to determine the proper functioning of these triage systems, their accuracy is evaluated using several divergent indicators encompassing sensitivity, speciﬁcity, positive and negative predictive value, overall accuracy, over-triage, and under-triage (16, 17). Sensitivity and speciﬁcity indicate the correct classiﬁcation of the affected people and the predictive value of the triage indicates the power of the triage method in correct classiﬁcation of these individuals. Over-triage categorizes injured individuals or patients in higher classes and under-triage in lower classes compared to their actual level of severity. In over-triage, the person is provided with a service that he/she does not need, resulting in waste of time and resources, on the contrary, in under-triage, the person is provided with services not meeting his actual needs, which can endanger the life of the individual (17, 18). Various studies have been conducted to estimate the accuracy of different types of triage systems worldwide, but, to the best of our knowledge, there is no comprehensive study on the comparison of different types of triage methods. In other words, in the studies done, only two or three methods have been compared. Consequently, the present study aims to assess and compare the accuracy of the indicators of the all triage systems through a systematic review. 2. Method 2.1. Study protocol and Search strategy The present study is a systematic review of the accuracy of the all triage systems used worldwide. The results of this study were based on the articles published in English language journals. In this research, all papers published from the beginning of 2000 to the end of 2019 were sought through the Medlib, Scopus, Web of Science, PubMed, Cochrane Library, Science Direct, and Google scholar databases. All articles with medical subject headings (MeSH) and keywords including triage systems, sensitivity, speciﬁcity, predictive values, over-triage, under-triage, disaster, and mass casualty incidents (MCIs) were searched; the keywords were used in isolation or in combination, using and/or: Triage systems OR disaster OR mass casualty incidents AND accuracy OR sensitivity OR speciﬁcity OR predictive values OR over triage OR under triage. 2.2. Screening and Data extraction Accordingly, all articles on triage systems were ﬁrst collected and, upon completion of the search, a list of abstracts was prepared. After concealing the proﬁle of the articles, such as the name of the author, the name of the magazine, etc., the full text of the articles was given to two qualiﬁed researchers to review the articles. Each article was independently reviewed by two people. If the articles were rejected by the two reviewers, the reason was also mentioned by them and in case of disagreement between them, the article was judged by a third reviewer. Data extraction was performed using a pre-prepared checklist that included the study location, study time, triage system, community under study, sensitivity, speciﬁcity, predictive value, over-triage, and undertriage. 2.3. Quality assessment The quality of articles was assessed using the Newcastle Ottawa Scale (NOS) checklist. This checklist includes 8 items, each ranging from 0 to 1. The scores between 0 to 5, 6-7, and 8 represent low, medium, and high quality, respectively. The lowest acceptable score for entering the study was 5 (19). 2.4. Inclusion and exclusion criteria Articles meeting all the following criteria were included in the study: addressing Triage systems; reporting one or all of following indexes including validity and reliability (sensitivity, speciﬁcity, positive and negative predictive values, overtriage, and under-triage); having high quality according to the NOS checklist, and being published in English. Interventional studies, conference proceedings, qualitative studies, and case reports, as well as studies not written in English were excluded. 2.5. Study selection There were 89 papers on triage systems, out of which, 36 and 21 articles were excluded due to repetitiveness and irrelevance to the study, respectively. After reviewing the abstract of the articles, 19 additional papers lacking the required information were excluded from the study. Finally, 13 articles, which met the inclusion criteria, were considered (Diagram 1). This open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial 3.0 License (CC BY-NC 3.0). Downloaded from: http://journals.sbmu.ac.ir/aaem 3 Archives of Academic Emergency Medicine. 2022; 10(1): e32 2.6. Triage systems in results Different studies have been done to evaluate the validity and reliability of the triage systems, with the aim to measure the accuracy of these systems in the evaluation of the injured people. Typically, the basics of performing triage systems are similar. So, a triage system should be used, which could recognize and prioritize the injured people, take less time, and manage resources based on the patients’ needs. The accuracy of the triage systems, which is evaluated using sensitivity, speciﬁcity, positive and negative predictive value, as well as the amount of overand under-triage, both of which affect the efﬁcient use of limited resources, can show the performance of the triage system in accurate prioritization of the patients and optimal use of the available resources. Accordingly, the present study aims to probe the accuracy of nine world-class triage systems, including START , mSTART , SALT , Smart, Care Flight, ASAV , MPTT , Sieve and ESI. The characteristics of the reviewed articles are presented in Table 1. 2.7. Triage Systems in the Prehospital Setting The START Triage system: This is one of the most common triage systems in large events such as natural disasters, used for people over 8 years of age. The duration of this triage is about 30 to 60 seconds. In this method, people are classiﬁed with green (minor injury), yellow (delayed), red (immediate) and black (died) tags, and the indicators under investigation in this system are the ability to walk, breathing and its rate, capillary reﬁll time, and the ability to follow commands (1, 17, 20). The mSTART triage system: This triage system is a modulated type of the START triage system whose performance and indices are similar to START triage system. The only difference is that, in the mSTART method, the capillary reﬁll time index is replaced by no palpable pulse index (21). The SALT triage system:Similar to the START method, in this method, individuals are categorized using green, yellow, red, and black tags, but people are prioritized in a different way. In the SALT method, people are ﬁrstly classiﬁed into three groups based on walking ability. Then, based on the prioritization performed in the ﬁrst stage, and with the aim of controlling life-threatening factors, the second step is to evaluate and take actions such as severe bleeding control, airway opening, chest compression, and antidote injection. Finally, following the treatment and response of the injured people to the treatment, they will be prioritized using one of the tags mentioned above, and then treated and transmitted to medical centers (1, 5, 22-24). The Smart Triage System: This triage system, like other systems, has 4 tags and determines priorities based on walking, breathing, capillary reﬁll time, and the ability to follow the commands (25). The Care Flight triage system: In the Care Flight triage method, people are assessed on the basis of walking ability, respiration, radial pulse, and the ability to follow the commands using 4 green (delayed), yellow (emergency), red (immediate) and black (unsalvageable) tags, with the difference that the criterion concerning “following commands” is checked before other criteria. This triage system is used to quickly target a large number of casualties and takes about 15 seconds to complete the triage (1). The ASAV Triage System: This triage system is a new triage method. Individuals, as in other triage methods, are classiﬁed via 4 tags including green (minor injury), yellow (delayed), red (immediate) and black (died). In this system, people are classiﬁed according to the severity of their bleeding, respiration, radial pulse, and the ability to follow commands (1, 26). The Sieve Triage System: This method is used for adults. In this method, people are prioritized using four colors: green, yellow, red, and black. The indicators investigated in this method are walking, respiration, and pulse rate (5). The MPTT Triage System: In this method, people are prioritized using 4 colors including green, yellow, red, and black. Indicators examined in this method include the ability to walk, breath, pulse, and Glasgow coma scale (GCS), indicating the level of consciousness of the person. 2.8. Triage Systems in Hospital Setting The 5-level triage system (ESI) (Emergency severity index): This is one of the most widely used triage systems, which is currently accepted by many countries around the world (26).