Review article Mortality and morbidity risks associated with floods: A systematic review and meta-analysis☆ Zhengyu Yang , Wenzhong Huang , Joanne E. McKenzie , Pei Yu , Ke Ju , Yao Wu , Bo Wen , Yuming Guo , Shanshan Li * School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, 3004, VIC, Australia ARTICLE INFO Keywords: Flood Disaster Human health Risk assessment Systematic review ABSTRACT Background: Flood disasters are projected to increase in severity, duration, and frequency in the context of climate change, and the risks of mortality and morbidity may increase after floods, which will overwhelm health systems. Objective: This study aims to synthesize current epidemiological evidence about the impacts of floods on mortality and morbidity. Method: After performing a systematic literature search from 2000 to 2023, we included studies involving human participants, with exposures of floods, and with outcomes of mortality or morbidity. Results: In total, 37 studies were included in evidence syntheses. Meta-analyses yielded an overall relative risk of 1.26 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.10, 1.46), 1.10 (1.08, 1.13), 1.11 (1.04, 1.20), and 1.38 (1.18, 1.62) for allcause mortality and morbidities of overall gastrointestinal diseases, diarrhea diseases, and dysentery, respectively. Although meta-analyses were not conducted, evidence from at least three studies consistently supported that exposure to floods was associated with increased risks of malaria and respiratory diseases. The evidence for other outcomes was reported but either limited or uncertain. Conclusion: This study suggests that exposure to floods is associated with increased risks of all-cause mortality and morbidities of overall gastrointestinal diseases, diarrhea diseases, dysentery, malaria, and respiratory diseases, while further research is urgently called. 1. Introduction As the most frequent natural disaster worldwide, floods have dramatic and extensive adverse impacts on the environment, economy, and human health (Hu et al., 2018a). The number of people affected by floods has been increasing in the past four decades (Hu et al., 2018a). As estimated, there are 1.81 billion people (23% of the world’s population) directly exposed to 1-in-100-year flood disasters (Rentschler et al., 2022). In the context of climate change, flood disasters are projected to increase in severity, duration, and frequency due to more frequent extreme precipitation events and rising sea levels (Tellman et al., 2021). Commonly, official records of health burden arising from floods have only considered deaths caused by the direct physical forces (e.g., drowning) or hazards (e.g., electrocution and hypothermia) of floods (Yan et al., 2020; Lindersson et al., 2023). However, these assessments have not considered the substantial number of deaths and diseases resulting from non-accidental causes. For example, non-accidental deaths and diseases may result from contamination of food and drinking water, exposure to pathogens (i.e., fungi, bacteria, and viruses), impaired access to health services, and displacement (Alderman et al., 2012; Dosa et al., 2020; Paterson et al., 2018). This suggests that the health impacts of floods are under-studied. Comprehensively understanding the impact of floods on mortality and morbidity is important for improving policies, including disaster response strategies and health system adaptation.