Of the studies that have examined the relationship between flood exposure with mortality and morbidity, the key gaps identified include the following (Zhong et al., 2018). First, most of the original studies focused on mental disorders, and the findings for other outcomes were mixed (Zhong et al., 2018). To our knowledge, no systematic review nor ☆ All authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. * Corresponding author. E-mail address: shanshan.li@monash.edu (S. Li). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Environmental Research journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envres https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2024.120263 Received 5 August 2024; Received in revised form 22 October 2024; Accepted 28 October 2024 Environmental Research 263 (2024) 120263 Available online 29 October 2024 0013-9351/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). meta-analysis was conducted for the association of flood exposure with mortality and morbidity other than mental disorders. There were two mapping reviews on this association, which primarily described the research pattern and landscape in the field through systematic literature searches but without findings synthesis and study quality assessment (Alderman et al., 2012; Zhong et al., 2018). In addition, one of them only included studies published during 2004–2011 (Alderman et al., 2012), while the other one did not consider short-term health impacts (i.e., <6 months), but included studies published over a more recent and broader time period (i.e., before 2016) (Zhong et al., 2018). Therefore, we aimed to undertake a systematic review with meta-analyses to address the gaps. Specifically, to examine the impacts of floods on mortality and morbidity. 2. Methods This systematic review was reported in accordance with the PRISMA statement and was registered on PROSPERO (CRD4202339981). (Page et al., 2021). 2.1. Eligibility criteria For this systematic review, studies were eligible if they were studies including humans, with exposures included floods, and with outcomes included mortality or morbidity. We excluded studies that only included life quality, external cause of deaths (e.g., injury and suicide), symptoms (e.g., cough, runny nose, rash, sore throat), or psychological health (e.g., post-traumatic stress disorder) as outcomes; and studies focusing on disasters that may lead to floods (e.g., hurricanes and earthquakes). We excluded studies based on the type of report including reviews, metaanalyses, descriptive studies, response letters, and conference abstracts. Studies in all languages were considered for inclusion. We only included eligible studies published from 2000 January 1st to 2023 March 10th. When studies with the same outcomes, same flood events, and similar time frames had overlapping populations, only the study with the largest population was included. 2.2. Search strategy OVID Medline, EMBASE, and Scopus were searched to identify eligible studies. We did not filter the searches by language. The search strategy consisted of search keyword searches and corresponding subject headings (if available) for flood and mortality or morbidity. The search strategies are available in Section 1 of Appendix. The references cited in relevant reviews identified in the literature search and publications linked to conference abstracts were also examined. Authors were contacted for additional information. 2.3. Screening and selection Two researchers (ZY and WH) independently screened the titles and abstracts of records identified through the literature search using the PICO Portal (https://www.picoportal.org/). Only records that were excluded by both researchers were excluded at this stage. Full-text of potentially eligible studies were retrieved, and screened independently by two researchers (ZY and WH). Disagreements on eligibility were resolved by consulting a senior researcher (PY). 2.4. Data extraction Data extraction was initially piloted by three researchers (ZY, WH, and PY) on a sample of four studies to ensure consistency of data extraction and to modify the data extraction where required. Following piloting, two researchers (ZY and WH) independently performed the data extraction. From each study, we extracted author names, publication year, outcomes, outcome ascertainment method, exposure assessment method, control group, source of the study population, flood events, study type, time frame of impacts (e.g., infectious morbidity was assumed to change during 0–14 days post exposure to flood), statistical analysis methods (e.g., adjustment for lag and covariates), effect estimates (and their confidence intervals). In studies where effects were reported for multiple time frames (e.g., 0–7 days and 0–14 days post flood exposure), the estimate of the longest time frame (i.e., 0–14 days) was extracted. Discrepancies and uncertainty were resolved in regular meetings of the three researchers (ZY, WH, and PY). 2.5. Assessment of risk of bias Two researchers (ZY and WH) independently assessed the risk of bias (RoB) of each study using the National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences National Toxicology Program Office of Health Assessment and Translation (OHAT) tool (Rooney et al., 2014). As recommended by developers of the OHAT tool, we tailored all criteria for our topic (see Table S1). Using these criteria, key domains (i.e., exposure assessment, outcome assessment, and confounding bias) and other domains (selection bias, attrition/exclusion bias, and other sources of bias) were judged as being at a definitely low, probably low, probably high, or definitely high RoB. Studies were judged to be at a “definitely high RoB” when they had at least one key domain with definitely high RoB and at least four domains with a “probably high” or “definitely high” RoB. Studies judged to have a “definitely high” RoB were excluded from any synthesis (qualitative or quantitative). Discrepancies and uncertainty were resolved in regular meetings of the three researchers (ZY, WH, and PY). 2.6. Data syntheses To determine whether a conclusion can be reached regarding the association of flood exposure with mortality and morbidity (Russo, 2007), inverse variance-weighted random-effects meta-analysis was used to combine relative risk (RR) estimates when three or more RRs with comparable time frames were available for a particular outcome (Wilker et al., 2023). We combined RR estimates based on two time frames, namely, <6 months and ≥6 months (Zhong et al., 2018). Estimates representing a single day (e.g. 11th day post exposure to the flood) or not measured by RRs were not included in the meta-analysis, but are reported. Odds ratios approximate RRs for rare outcomes (i.e. with event rates <10%) and so were treated as RRs and included in the meta-analyses in this circumstance (Sedgwick, 2014; Grimes and Schulz, 2008). We chose the random-effects model because we expected there would be diversity in population, setting and study design across studies (Borenstein et al., 2010). We used the restricted maximum likelihood estimator for between study variability and the Knapp-Hartung method for confidence intervals (Wilker et al., 2023; Borenstein et al., 2010). We quantified inconsistency using the I2 statistic and formally tested for heterogeneity using Cochran’s Q test. We used forest plots to visually display the effect estimates from studies included in meta-analyses and for those not included in a meta-analysis (i.e., when there fewer than three estimates for a particular outcome and timeframe). We undertook post-hoc sensitivity analyses to examine the impact on the meta-analysis estimates of excluding studies with at least three domains with probably/definitely high RoB and by using fixed-effect models. 3. Results 3.1. Studies characteristics Of the initially identified 5871 records, 1914 were duplicates, and 3859 were excluded at the title/abstract screening stage (Fig. 1). From the 98 full-text articles retrieved, 50 studies met the inclusion criteria (Table S2); however, 13 were judged to be at a definitely high RoB, and were excluded from the qualitative and quantitative syntheses Z. Yang et al. Environmental Research 263 (2024) 120263 2 (Table S2). Consequently, a total of 37 studies were synthesized (Fig. 1). These studies represented 17 countries/territories in eight sub-regions. Most (26/37) studies were conducted in Asia. More than half (20/37) of the studies only covered flood events within one year (Fig. 2B). Almost all studies were restricted to the impacts within one state/ province (Table 1), except for five estimating the impacts of flood events across Ireland (Boudou et al., 2021), mainland China (Guo et al., 2020), Thailand (Suwanpakdee et al., 2015), Vietnam (Phung et al., 2021), and the United Kingdom (Milojevic et al., 2011), respectively. Time-series study was the most widely used study design (Fig. 2C). 3.1.1.