Additionally, the risk of low birth weight was also found to increase (RR 1.11 [1.03, 1.21]) during 0–4 years post the flood event in the USA. 3.3.7. Malnutrition The risk of malnutrition among children aged 6–59 months was estimated by Rodriguez-Llanes et al. in two studies in a district in Orissa, India (Fig. 4). (Rodriguez-Llanes et al., 2011, 2016) These studies were based on the same population and flood events, but with different time frames and sample sizes. They found that the risks of stunting and being underweight were higher in exposed group in the second month post exposure; however the association for wasting was statistically insignificant (Rodriguez-Llanes et al., 2011). At one year after the flood event, they found that there was an increased risk of being underweight and wasting (Rodriguez-Llanes et al., 2016). 3.3.8. Cognitive dysfunction Two studies investigated the impacts of floods on cognitive dysfunction (Fig. 4). One estimated the impact on the risk of cognitive decline among elderly population (i.e., >65 year-old) during 0–6 months post a flood event in Japan (Yoshida et al., 2021), and found an increased risk among the exposed group (RR 1.12 [1.00, 1.26]). The other study assessed the impact of the 1998 Yangtze River Flood on the risk of cognitive impairment among 108175 four to eight year-old children across 31 provinces in mainland China (Guo et al., 2020). This study found an increase risk among children that were exposed to the flood event during perinatal period. 4. Discussion This is the first systematic review for the associations of flood with mortality and morbidity. We synthesized findings from previous studies after study quality assessment. We found that flood exposure was associated with increased risks of all-cause mortality and morbidities of overall gastrointestinal diseases, diarrhea diseases, dysentery, malaria, and respiratory disease after flood exposure. Evidence for other health outcomes was limited or uncertain. 4.1. Health impact pathways Floods can result in diseases and deaths in several potential pathways. First, floods can contaminate water supply systems (Barbetta et al., 2022), through which the risks of gastrointestinal diseases can increase, and the transmission of some infectious diseases (e.g., typhoid and paratyphoid) can be facilitated (Lee et al., 2020). Second, floods can create breeding grounds for fungi, bacteria, viruses, and vectors (e.g., mice, cockroaches, and mosquitoes) (Suhr and Steinert, 2022). When this occurs, outbreaks of infectious diseases, including plague, malaria, Japanese encephalitis, and leptospirosis may be triggered (Suhr and Steinert, 2022). Third, flood events can force people to evacuate, leading to displacement. Even though temporary accommodation may be provided, hygiene issues still commonly occur from poor access to sanitation facilities (Paterson et al., 2018). Hence, the risks of water-borne diseases, infectious diseases, and infections can rise. Displacements also mean limited access to medical and health facilities, which may lead to delayed diagnoses and treatments, more complications, exacerbated prognosis, and consequently elevated mortality; lacking protection from environmental hazards (e.g., non-optimal temperatures), which impact a broad range of health conditions (Zhao et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021b; Wu et al., 2022); and high densities of fungi, bacteria, virus, and vectors in limited rooms (Lee et al., 2020). Forth, mortality and morbidity can be exacerbated by disaster-related psychological disorders via many mechanisms including weakening immune systems, sleep problems, substance abuses, and poor self-care (Trief et al., 2006; Sharpe and Davison, 2021). 4.2. Research gaps and future perspectives 4.2.1. Potential effect modifications Considering the health impact pathways of floods, the health effects of flood may be modified by location- (e.g., socioeconomic status, dietary habit, sewage system, disaster response strategies, medicine sources), climate- (e.g., climate zone, temperature, and humidity), biology- (e.g., density of mosquitos, vegetation types), and flood-related (e.g., severity, duration, and flood types) factors, as well as vulnerabilities of populations (e.g., children, elderly population, and people with pre-existing chronic diseases). Understanding these effect modifications helps identify the most vulnerable populations, which is essential for targeting protections and preventions. Furthermore, the understanding can facilitate predicting the health effects in places where health data are not available, mostly low-income countries, which could be used to estimate flood-attributable health burden to optimize resource allocations. 4.2.2. Temporal and spatial coverages We found that the temporal (i.e., flood events) and spatial coverages (i.e., locations) of almost studies were limited. This means that the generalizations of these effect estimates were compromised. To obtain more reliable estimates, studies with a broad temporal and spatial coverages are warranted. Z. Yang et al. Environmental Research 263 (2024) 120263 12 4.2.3. Time frame and lag effects Most studies only arbitrarily/empirically assumed a time frame for the lag effect, without examining the time frames statistically. Lag effects for gastrointestinal diseases and infectious diseases have been statistically examined by some studies, considering the breeding, incubation, and latent periods of pathogens (Liu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2016a; Wang et al., 2021). The findings consistently suggested that the risk of gastrointestinal diseases reached the peak on several days post flood exposure (Liu et al., 2016, 2017, 2019; Zhang et al., 2016b; Ni et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2021). The impacts on mortality and morbidity may be delayed because the pathways between flood and human health are not immediate. However, the lag effects were understudied for most health impacts. Identifying the lag-response associations related to flood exposure is a key to coping with elevated mortality and morbidity risks after flood events. 4.3. Clinical and policy implications Both health service providers and policymakers should be aware of the increased health risks post floods, when health/medicine service demands will sharply rise. Considering that the capability and accessibility of health systems are generally disrupted during floods, the unfulfillment for the increasing health/medicine service demands will be exacerbated, especially in communities poor in health/medicine resources or with infrastructures vulnerable to floods (Romanello et al., 2023). To optimize prognosis, reduce avoidable deaths from natural causes, and ease flood-attributable health burden, health service providers should strengthen capacities in medical supplies, human resource management, and triage strategy; and policymakers should periodize enhancing health system resilience to natural disasters, as well as improving disaster preparedness, early warning and detection systems, and efficient disaster response protocols to reduce the hazardous exposure during and post floods. 4.4. Conclusions Previous studies had examined an extensive range of mortality and morbidity risks related to floods, although studies were scarce in almost all countries/territories. We undertook a systematic review examining the associations between floods and health outcomes and found associations of flood exposure with elevated risks of all-cause mortality and morbidities of overall gastrointestinal diseases, diarrhea diseases, dysentery, malaria, and respiratory diseases. These findings suggest that medical practitioners and policymakers should raise awareness and preparation for the elevated burden on health systems after flood events. The evidence for the morbidities of other infectious diseases, cardiovascular diseases, skin and eye diseases, adverse birth and pregnancy outcomes, malnutrition, and cognitive dysfunction was either limited or uncertain. Future studies examining more flood events and locations, effect modifiers, and the lag effects of flood exposure with mortality and morbidity are needed. CRediT authorship contribution statement Zhengyu Yang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Wenzhong Huang: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Joanne E. McKenzie: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation. Pei Yu: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Ke Ju: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. Yao Wu: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. Bo Wen: Writing – review & editing, Data curation. Yuming Guo: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Shanshan Li: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Ethical approval Ethical approval was not needed because this study does not involve human participants. Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process During the preparation of this work, the authors did not use any generative AI or AI-assisted technology. Consent to publish Consent was not needed because this study does not involve human participants. Funding This study was supported by the Australian Research Council (DP210102076) and the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (GNT2000581, GNT2008813, and GNT2009866), which were received by YG. The funders had no role in the study design or in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data, writing of the report, or decision to submit the article for publication.