The study of the vulnerability of humans to climate change Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph192316356 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 2 of 22 is one of the key concepts to understanding their ability to adapt to changes in climate hazards [13]. Approaches for assessing vulnerability have progressed since previous IPCC assessments. For example, the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) of the IPCC expressed that vulnerability is a function of three factors, which are exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity [14]. The AR5 of the IPCC proposed the concept of risk. Risk is the function of four factors, which are hazard (new term in AR5), exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity. Since then, studies have been conducted to examine the link between the new concept of risk in AR5 and the existing concept of vulnerability in AR4 [15–17]. The IPCC has published its AR6 and deﬁned vulnerability as “the propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected and encompasses a variety of concepts and elements, including sensitivity or susceptibility to harm and lack of capacity to cope and adapt” [ 4]. These frameworks were formulated for all climate change hazards. Despite the progress in the science of vulnerability, there is no systematic and consistent conceptual framework speciﬁcally for heat hazard [ 18]. There is a growing body of literature on heat vulnerability frameworks focusing on various components such as exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity [ 18–21]. Heat vulnerability is how likely a person is to be injured or harmed during hot weather. Extreme heat, such as heatwaves, can impair thermoregulation and affect multiple organs, including the heart, lungs, renal system, central nervous system, and digestive tract [22]. Impaired thermoregulation, for example, can cause dehydration, increased blood viscosity, and burden the heart function, ultimately leading to cardiac failure [23]. Additionally, heatwave occurrences impact mental illness [24]. Some studies conceptualized heat vulnerability as comprising two elements: human exposure to heat and human sensitivity [25]. Wilhelmi and Hayden (2010) proposed a heat vulnerability framework and described that the sensitivity component to heat involves an individual’s characteristics (health status, socio-demographics, etc.) as well as certain aspects of the community where one lives (environment, community demographics) [26]. These factors can play an essential role in one’s ability to adapt to heat. Several studies have determined that heatwave events will severely affect vulnerable groups such as the elderly, infants, and people with pre-existing chronic conditions [27–29]. However, some inconsistent results were shown in other studies [11,30,31], inﬂuenced by the variability in the mortality and morbidity indicators, statistical analysis methods used, and differences in the population’s sensitivity, adaptive capacity, and coping mechanisms. Another factor causing these inconsistencies was the variability in heatwave deﬁnitions and locality factors. To date, there is no standardized deﬁnition of a heatwave. As an example, some studies used a daily temperature exceeding 90th to 98th percentile for at least two consecutive days [31–33]. Meanwhile, a study conducted in Thailand used 30 different heatwave deﬁnitions [34]. These heterogeneous deﬁnitions made it challenging to estimate the pooling of effect estimation of heatwave impact on human health. In addition, locality factors (continents and geographical conditions) may signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the temperature of each locality [4]. Furthermore, most of the literature involving health impact studies was conﬁned to mortality or morbidity rather than actual health outcomes [ 35–38]. Thus, this review aims to present heatwaves’ impact on mortality and morbidity and identify vulnerability, focusing on the sensitivity components for both outcomes. 2. Materials and Methods This study, guided by the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) review protocol, was explicitly designed for systematic reviews and meta-analyses [39], following the systematic review protocol [40] registered on PROSPERO (CRD42021232847). Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 3 of 22 2.1. Inclusion Criteria It was formulated based on PECO [41], a tool based on three main concepts: participants (human), exposure (heatwave), comparator (mortality and morbidity), and outcomes (vulnerability factors). Included were research-based articles, peer-reviewed, English publications from 2012 to 2022 focused on heatwaves, study ﬁndings comprising both heatwave-related mortality/morbidity impact and vulnerability factors (focusing on the sensitivity component), and involved human participants. 2.2. Study Selection and Data Search Related articles were identiﬁed by searching the Scopus, Web of Science, EBSCO host, and PubMed databases. The search string was created and generated using Boolean operators and keyword search (Supplementary Table S1). Following the removal of duplicates, two reviewers independently examined the titles and abstracts of all identiﬁed studies to select the articles based on the predetermined selection criteria. 2.3. Quality Assessment The article’s quality was determined by using the Navigation Guide Systematic Review framework [41] (Supplementary Table S2 and Figure S1). The third reviewer resolved any disagreement. 2.4. Data Extraction and Synthesis Following the initial search, we created a standardized form to extract the following data: author and study year, study design, study location, type of climate, meteorological data, heatwave deﬁnitions, health data, statistical analysis, heatwave impact on mortality and morbidity, as well as the sensitivity component of vulnerability assessment. Selected articles were divided into two groups based on mortality and morbidity outcomes. Sensitivity factors and statistical results from the quantitative analysis were thoroughly described using a narrative synthesis. Finally, the ﬁndings of the selected articles were merged using a narrative approach for the overall results. 3. Results A total of 32 articles were selected and analyzed to identify the impact of heatwaves on mortality, morbidity, and the associated vulnerability factors (focusing on the sensitivity component) (Figure 1). Most articles involved time series studies (n = 27), and the rest were case-crossover studies (n = 5). The included articles represented most of the continents in the world: Asia, 14; Oceania, 8; Europe, 5; North America, 4; and South America, 1. In addition, the articles spanned lower, upper, middle, and high-income countries. Most of the studies were conducted in warm and temperate regions (n = 19) and cold and temperate (n = 7). The rest of the studies were conducted in the tropical region ( n = 3), low and subarctic region (n = 2), and temperate region (n = 1). Fifteen articles described mortality’s impacts and vulnerability factors (focusing on the sensitivity component), while another eighteen addressed morbidity. Table 1 summarises the characteristics and main ﬁndings of the studies included in this systematic review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 4 of 22 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, x 4 of 21 Figure 1. The PRISMA flow diagram. Figure 1. The PRISMA ﬂow diagram. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 5 of 22 Table 1. Characteristics and main ﬁndings of the selected studies ( n = 30).