Meanwhile, four articles reported female gender is a significant risk factor for heatwave-related morbidity . Another study in Vietnam showed that the female gender was associated with increased all-cause hospitalizations by 8.1% (95% CI: 2.6–13.9%) [46]. Tables 2 and 3 show additional information. 4. Discussion 4.1. Heatwave Impact on Mortality and Morbidity Included articles in this systematic review showed that exposure to heatwaves negatively impacts mortality and morbidity. However, the impact varied across studies and regions. For example, the literature included in the present study had multifactorial causes of mortality and morbidity indicators. Most of the causes of death were related to the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, which might be due to these diseases being the most common worldwide. The impact on morbidity also had varying underlying causes. However, the most common cause of heatwave-related hospitalizations was similar to that of mortality; cardiopulmonary-related diseases. 4.2. Sensitivity Component of Vulnerability Assessment This current review adopted the sensitivity component of the vulnerability assessment proposed by a previous study [26]. It is ideal for studying all the components of vulnerability assessment for a more comprehensive ﬁnding. However, the diversity of vulnerability conceptualizations is seen in different contexts, referring to different systems being exposed to different hazards [13,66,67]. In this review, three major sensitivities of the vulnerability assessment factors were identiﬁed: sociodemographic, medical conditions, and locality characteristics. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 17 of 22 4.2.1. Sociodemographic Age was one of the critical factors for the population’s vulnerability to heatwave exposure. The review shows that the impact of heatwaves on mortality and morbidity involves all age groups, the elderly group being the most vulnerable, explained by the decreased efﬁciency in body temperature regulation because of aging [ 68]. In addition, it is common for this group to live with co-morbid chronic medical illnesses such as heart disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) [ 69]. Thus, combined risk factors of age and co-morbidity increase the susceptibility to heat-related illnesses. Additionally, children are at risk due to their underdeveloped body regulatory systems [70]. They are also vulnerable as they tend to spend more time playing outdoors [70]. People in the working-age group are also at risk from the impact of heatwaves due to their work activities [71]. In this review, the risk for heatwave impacts varies across gender, which can be inﬂuenced by factors such as pre-existing medical conditions, social support, and the type of work exposure of a particular person. For example, males may be at risk in some locations where outdoor work roles are predominantly male-dominated [28]. However, females may be at greater risk as women had a higher risk due to a high surface-to-mass ratio and greater subcutaneous fat thickness than men [72]. Low socioeconomic status has been identiﬁed as a common risk factor for any disease or health issues, including vulnerability to the impact of heatwaves [73,74]. There are reasons that make those living in low socioeconomic classes more vulnerable to the effects of heatwaves. Lower socioeconomic status is commonly associated with other medical conditions, such as malnutrition and infectious disease, which can aggravate the impact of heatwaves on health. In addition, because of their ﬁnancial status, this group has less access to household amenities, such as fans, proper housing ventilation, and AC, which are essential for reducing the impact of heatwaves by cooling the body temperature. The nature of jobs commonly associated with outdoor work, such as construction and menial jobs, exposes people to high temperatures. Using fans and air conditioners reduces the risk of heat-related death [75]. These amenities are essential for faster body cooling and avoiding the harmful effects of heatwaves. This will be a problem, particularly for people in low and middle-income countries. A lack of knowledge of heatwaves may expose a person to the negative impact of heatwaves on health. Most media sources provide vital information on heatwaves, such as their effects and preventive measures. However, better understanding requires knowledge and education levels. Thus, a person with a lower education level is subject to a more signiﬁcant impact than a more educated person. 4.2.2. Medical Conditions People with speciﬁc medical conditions are vulnerable to heatwaves. In the present systematic review, several medical conditions showed signiﬁcant evidence of heatwave adverse effects on mortality and morbidity. People with cardiovascular disease are affected by heatwave exposure. The underlying pathophysiologic mechanism for the relation between heat stress and cardiovascular disease, such as increased red and white cell counts in the circulation, leads to increased blood viscosity, platelet release into the bloodstream, and reduced plasma volume [76]. A similar impact is seen in people with respiratory disease. Human thermal regulation attempts to maintain a safe body temperature during heatwave exposure, resulting in increased cardiac output and hyperventilation. Consequently, the respiratory rate and tidal volume will increase, worsening respiratory diseases such as asthma and COPD and requiring hospitalization [77]. People with renal disease can be compromised during a heatwave. The underlying mechanism is that exposure to heatwaves increases dehydration risk and leads to electrolyte imbalance [78], which imposes extra stress on renal function and exacerbates pre-existing renal diseases. Autonomic neuropathy in diabetic patients makes them more vulnerable to heatwave effects [79]. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 18 of 22 In addition, heatwaves increase the risk of mental health-related outcomes. One possible explanation is exposing people to psychological trauma associated with higher frequency, intensity, and duration of climate-related disasters, including extreme heat exposure or heatwave events [80]. Identifying the population suffering from these medical conditions could help local health authorities and service providers incorporate mental health impacts into their heatwave warning systems, as well as develop public health policies and guidelines to address preventable heat-related mental health mortality and morbidity. However, the ﬁndings of these medical conditions on mortality and morbidity varied between studies. This scenario can be explained by the variability of other factors inﬂuencing the outcome. Thus, further studies are warranted to address this uncertainty. 4.2.3. Locality In rural areas, the population is at risk of the impact of heatwaves, possibly due to socioeconomic factors, medical infrastructure, and the aging population. For example, economic activities in rural areas are conducted outdoors, and a heatwave’s impact during extreme heat can be ampliﬁed. Thus, evaluating this population’s knowledge, perception, and adaptive behavior is crucial for an early preventive plan. Meanwhile, urban areas are commonly associated with the urban heat island (UHI) phenomenon. The UHI effect is mainly due to human activities and construction that lead to heat accumulation [81]. The effects of UHI can be mitigated by improved energy efﬁciency, urban landscape optimization, green roof construction, high reﬂectivity material utilization, and green land cultivation. Different climatic zones also play a role in determining the population’s heat sensitivity. Different climatic zones had different effects in this review. Acclimatization of the people, behavioral adaptations, medical infrastructure, availability of heat warning systems, and other factors could play a role. Most of the literature included in this review was from developed countries. One possible explanation is that these countries have sufﬁcient resources for studying this topic and publishing their ﬁndings. Developing and warmer countries, such as Southeast Asia, experience more frequent, long-lasting, and intense heatwaves [82]. However, there are limited publications from these countries, which may underestimate the burden of heatwaves on these particular countries. 5. Conclusions Mortality and morbidity indicators, including all-cause and cause-speciﬁc, are critical for measuring heatwave impacts on human health.