Signiﬁcant increment of heatwave-related urinary disease admissions by 88.3% compared to non-heatwave Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 16 of 22 days [48]. Another in Australia reported an effect on hospitalization for diabetes during heatwaves (OR 1.37, 95% CI: 1.11, 1.69) [55]. 3.2.2. Sensitivity Component of the Vulnerability Assessment for Morbidity The highest-ranked sensitivity of the vulnerability assessment was being elderly, with 13 articles reporting similar ﬁndings. A study in Australia that measured the impact of heatwaves on hospital ED visits showed that patients aged >75 years had signiﬁcant risk factors (RR = 1.28, 95% CI: 1.09, 1.50) [11]. A study in the USA showed that the elderly had a signiﬁcant association with hyperthermia-related hospitalization (RR 11.4, 95% CI: 9.55, 13.25) [56]. Seven articles reported that children had a signiﬁcant association with heatwaverelated morbidity. Heatwaves increased the risk of all-cause hospitalizations among children by 11% [31]. For heatwave-related ambulance callouts, children < 5 years old have a signiﬁcant sensitivity in the vulnerability assessment (OR 1.36, 95% CI: 1.10, 1.68) [ 61]. The male gender followed this with six articles. A study in the USA showed male gender had a signiﬁcant risk for heatwave-related asthma hospitalization (Odds ratio (OR) 1.12, 95% CI: 1.04, 1.22) [9] and a signiﬁcant vulnerability assessment for cardiovascular-related admission by Kang et al. (2016) [ 45]. A study on heatwave-related ambulance callouts showed male gender as a signiﬁcant sensitivity of the vulnerability assessment (RR 1.03, 95% CI: 1.02, 1.03) [54]. Heatwaves significantly impacted patients with cardiorespiratory diseases such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, and pneumonia, found in this study[9,11,42,46]. In addition, a study in Australia found that respiratory and cardiovascular diseases increased emergency department visits by 2% and 1%, respectively , during heatwave days [11]. A population-based retrospective cohort study showed a significant increase in hospitalization for diabetic patients during heatwaves [55]. Five articles reported low socioeconomic status was significantly associated with heatwave-related morbidity . A study by T oloo et al. (2014) showed that low socioeconomic status was associated with increased emergency department visits by 12% compared to non-heatwave days [11]. Meanwhile, four articles reported female gender is a significant risk factor for heatwave-related morbidity . Another study in Vietnam showed that the female gender was associated with increased all-cause hospitalizations by 8.1% (95% CI: 2.6–13.9%) [46]. Tables 2 and 3 show additional information. 4. Discussion 4.1. Heatwave Impact on Mortality and Morbidity Included articles in this systematic review showed that exposure to heatwaves negatively impacts mortality and morbidity. However, the impact varied across studies and regions. For example, the literature included in the present study had multifactorial causes of mortality and morbidity indicators. Most of the causes of death were related to the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, which might be due to these diseases being the most common worldwide. The impact on morbidity also had varying underlying causes. However, the most common cause of heatwave-related hospitalizations was similar to that of mortality; cardiopulmonary-related diseases. 4.2. Sensitivity Component of Vulnerability Assessment This current review adopted the sensitivity component of the vulnerability assessment proposed by a previous study [26]. It is ideal for studying all the components of vulnerability assessment for a more comprehensive ﬁnding. However, the diversity of vulnerability conceptualizations is seen in different contexts, referring to different systems being exposed to different hazards [13,66,67]. In this review, three major sensitivities of the vulnerability assessment factors were identiﬁed: sociodemographic, medical conditions, and locality characteristics. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 17 of 22 4.2.1. Sociodemographic Age was one of the critical factors for the population’s vulnerability to heatwave exposure. The review shows that the impact of heatwaves on mortality and morbidity involves all age groups, the elderly group being the most vulnerable, explained by the decreased efﬁciency in body temperature regulation because of aging [ 68]. In addition, it is common for this group to live with co-morbid chronic medical illnesses such as heart disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) [ 69]. Thus, combined risk factors of age and co-morbidity increase the susceptibility to heat-related illnesses. Additionally, children are at risk due to their underdeveloped body regulatory systems [70]. They are also vulnerable as they tend to spend more time playing outdoors [70]. People in the working-age group are also at risk from the impact of heatwaves due to their work activities [71]. In this review, the risk for heatwave impacts varies across gender, which can be inﬂuenced by factors such as pre-existing medical conditions, social support, and the type of work exposure of a particular person. For example, males may be at risk in some locations where outdoor work roles are predominantly male-dominated [28]. However, females may be at greater risk as women had a higher risk due to a high surface-to-mass ratio and greater subcutaneous fat thickness than men [72]. Low socioeconomic status has been identiﬁed as a common risk factor for any disease or health issues, including vulnerability to the impact of heatwaves [73,74]. There are reasons that make those living in low socioeconomic classes more vulnerable to the effects of heatwaves. Lower socioeconomic status is commonly associated with other medical conditions, such as malnutrition and infectious disease, which can aggravate the impact of heatwaves on health. In addition, because of their ﬁnancial status, this group has less access to household amenities, such as fans, proper housing ventilation, and AC, which are essential for reducing the impact of heatwaves by cooling the body temperature. The nature of jobs commonly associated with outdoor work, such as construction and menial jobs, exposes people to high temperatures. Using fans and air conditioners reduces the risk of heat-related death [75]. These amenities are essential for faster body cooling and avoiding the harmful effects of heatwaves. This will be a problem, particularly for people in low and middle-income countries. A lack of knowledge of heatwaves may expose a person to the negative impact of heatwaves on health. Most media sources provide vital information on heatwaves, such as their effects and preventive measures. However, better understanding requires knowledge and education levels. Thus, a person with a lower education level is subject to a more signiﬁcant impact than a more educated person. 4.2.2. Medical Conditions People with speciﬁc medical conditions are vulnerable to heatwaves. In the present systematic review, several medical conditions showed signiﬁcant evidence of heatwave adverse effects on mortality and morbidity. People with cardiovascular disease are affected by heatwave exposure. The underlying pathophysiologic mechanism for the relation between heat stress and cardiovascular disease, such as increased red and white cell counts in the circulation, leads to increased blood viscosity, platelet release into the bloodstream, and reduced plasma volume [76]. A similar impact is seen in people with respiratory disease. Human thermal regulation attempts to maintain a safe body temperature during heatwave exposure, resulting in increased cardiac output and hyperventilation.