However, females may be at greater risk as women had a higher risk due to a high surface-to-mass ratio and greater subcutaneous fat thickness than men [72]. Low socioeconomic status has been identiﬁed as a common risk factor for any disease or health issues, including vulnerability to the impact of heatwaves [73,74]. There are reasons that make those living in low socioeconomic classes more vulnerable to the effects of heatwaves. Lower socioeconomic status is commonly associated with other medical conditions, such as malnutrition and infectious disease, which can aggravate the impact of heatwaves on health. In addition, because of their ﬁnancial status, this group has less access to household amenities, such as fans, proper housing ventilation, and AC, which are essential for reducing the impact of heatwaves by cooling the body temperature. The nature of jobs commonly associated with outdoor work, such as construction and menial jobs, exposes people to high temperatures. Using fans and air conditioners reduces the risk of heat-related death [75]. These amenities are essential for faster body cooling and avoiding the harmful effects of heatwaves. This will be a problem, particularly for people in low and middle-income countries. A lack of knowledge of heatwaves may expose a person to the negative impact of heatwaves on health. Most media sources provide vital information on heatwaves, such as their effects and preventive measures. However, better understanding requires knowledge and education levels. Thus, a person with a lower education level is subject to a more signiﬁcant impact than a more educated person. 4.2.2. Medical Conditions People with speciﬁc medical conditions are vulnerable to heatwaves. In the present systematic review, several medical conditions showed signiﬁcant evidence of heatwave adverse effects on mortality and morbidity. People with cardiovascular disease are affected by heatwave exposure. The underlying pathophysiologic mechanism for the relation between heat stress and cardiovascular disease, such as increased red and white cell counts in the circulation, leads to increased blood viscosity, platelet release into the bloodstream, and reduced plasma volume [76]. A similar impact is seen in people with respiratory disease. Human thermal regulation attempts to maintain a safe body temperature during heatwave exposure, resulting in increased cardiac output and hyperventilation. Consequently, the respiratory rate and tidal volume will increase, worsening respiratory diseases such as asthma and COPD and requiring hospitalization [77]. People with renal disease can be compromised during a heatwave. The underlying mechanism is that exposure to heatwaves increases dehydration risk and leads to electrolyte imbalance [78], which imposes extra stress on renal function and exacerbates pre-existing renal diseases. Autonomic neuropathy in diabetic patients makes them more vulnerable to heatwave effects [79]. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 18 of 22 In addition, heatwaves increase the risk of mental health-related outcomes. One possible explanation is exposing people to psychological trauma associated with higher frequency, intensity, and duration of climate-related disasters, including extreme heat exposure or heatwave events [80]. Identifying the population suffering from these medical conditions could help local health authorities and service providers incorporate mental health impacts into their heatwave warning systems, as well as develop public health policies and guidelines to address preventable heat-related mental health mortality and morbidity. However, the ﬁndings of these medical conditions on mortality and morbidity varied between studies. This scenario can be explained by the variability of other factors inﬂuencing the outcome. Thus, further studies are warranted to address this uncertainty. 4.2.3. Locality In rural areas, the population is at risk of the impact of heatwaves, possibly due to socioeconomic factors, medical infrastructure, and the aging population. For example, economic activities in rural areas are conducted outdoors, and a heatwave’s impact during extreme heat can be ampliﬁed. Thus, evaluating this population’s knowledge, perception, and adaptive behavior is crucial for an early preventive plan. Meanwhile, urban areas are commonly associated with the urban heat island (UHI) phenomenon. The UHI effect is mainly due to human activities and construction that lead to heat accumulation [81]. The effects of UHI can be mitigated by improved energy efﬁciency, urban landscape optimization, green roof construction, high reﬂectivity material utilization, and green land cultivation. Different climatic zones also play a role in determining the population’s heat sensitivity. Different climatic zones had different effects in this review. Acclimatization of the people, behavioral adaptations, medical infrastructure, availability of heat warning systems, and other factors could play a role. Most of the literature included in this review was from developed countries. One possible explanation is that these countries have sufﬁcient resources for studying this topic and publishing their ﬁndings. Developing and warmer countries, such as Southeast Asia, experience more frequent, long-lasting, and intense heatwaves [82]. However, there are limited publications from these countries, which may underestimate the burden of heatwaves on these particular countries. 5. Conclusions Mortality and morbidity indicators, including all-cause and cause-speciﬁc, are critical for measuring heatwave impacts on human health. The sensitivity in the context of sociodemographic, medical conditions, and locality posed a higher heat vulnerability to certain groups. The impact of heatwaves on mortality and morbidity involves all age groups, especially the elderly and children. People with speciﬁc medical conditions, particularly cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, are most vulnerable to heatwave impacts of mortality and morbidity. The impact of heatwaves on mortality and morbidity and their associated vulnerability factors varies depending on the locality. These ﬁndings can help stakeholders strategize effective plans to reduce the effects of heatwaves according to their target populations and respective areas. Nevertheless, further study on the other component of vulnerability assessment, such as adaptive capacity, will provide more information on identifying vulnerable populations. Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:// www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijerph192316356/s1, Table S1: Keyword search used in the screening process; Table S2: Navigation Guide Systematic Review ratings of each study; Figure S1: Weighted bar plots. Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.S.A. and R.H.; Methodology, F.S.A., R.H., N.A. and M.B.; Data collection, F.S.A. and M.B.; Data processing, F.S.A.; Writing—original draft preparation, F.S.A.; Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 16356 19 of 22 Writing—review and editing, R.H., N.A., R.I., N.M., Y.O. and M.F.M.R.; Supervision, R.H., N.A. and F.T. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research received no external funding. Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article or Supplementary Materials. Acknowledgments: This review is a part of research by the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia under Long-term Research Grant Scheme project 3, grant number LRGS/1/2020/UKM–UKM/01/6/3, which is under the program of LRGS/1/2020/UKM–UKM/01/6. We would like to thank the Ministry of Health Malaysia for the permission to publish this article. Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.