Annotations of major heat and cold events in the figure are added by the authors. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 3 temperature-mortality effects in order to guide adaptation planning, inform targeted health interventions, and support sound and evidencebased health impact projections. To address this need and to establish the state of the available evidence, identify knowledge gaps, and highlight future research directions, we systematically reviewed the existing literature on temperature-related mortality in South Asia. Through a systematic review and a meta-analysis we investigated the following hypothesis: “Are ambient temperature (high and low), and heat wave events associated with increased all-cause mortality in the general population in South Asia?”. We developed a “Population”, “Exposure”, “Comparator”, and “Outcomes” and “study design” (PECOs) statement as follows: ▪ Population: the general population in South Asia (as defined by the World Bank in August 2018: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka) ▪ Exposure: high and low ambient temperatures (defined as daily/weekly/monthly/annual mean/max/min temperatures or a composite index of temperature and other weather variable) and heat wave events. ▪ Comparators: A comparable population not exposed to the same temperature or heat wave event or the same population at a time when it was not exposed to the same ambient temperature or heat wave event. ▪ Outcome: all-cause or cause-specific mortality, Years of Life Lost (YLL), changes in life expectancy ▪ Study design: quantitative observational studies We also perform more narrative review on the following exploratory research questions: i) “Are ambient temperatures (high and low), and heat wave events associated with increased cause-specific mortality in the general population in South Asia?”, ii) Are certain population groups at higher risk of mortality from exposure to ambient temperature?”, iii) At what time lags do temperature effects on mortality occur for the population in South Asia?” We add to previous systematic reviews conducted for tropical regions (Burkart et al., 2014a), LMICs (Green et al., 2019) and India (Salve et al., 2018) by covering both effects from heat wave episodes and ambient temperature, assessing the strength and quality of the body of evidence, and including a meta-analysis of exposure–response functions based on a novel approach that allows combining nonlinear exposure–response associations without access to data from individual studies. We also identify key areas for future research. 2. Methods 2.1. Search strategy We performed a systematic search of four electronic databases - Pubmed, Web of Science, Scopus, Embase – in order to identify epidemiological studies examining the direct relationship between ambient temperature and all-cause and cause-specific mortality in South Asia. We restricted the search to peer-reviewed articles published in English between January 1990 and August 2020. The search was initially run on 16 August 2018, and later updated on 13 August 2020. The systematic review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines and was based on a registered review protocol accessible online (PROSPERO CRD42018105730) (Dimitrova and Tonne, 2018). To ensure that all relevant articles were identified, we screened bibliographic reference lists of all included studies manually. Example of an exact electronic search strategy is provided in Supplementary Table S1. 2.2. Selection of studies We considered peer-reviewed studies published since 1990 in English, which examined any of the eight countries in the region as defined by the World Bank in August 2018 (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka), South Asia as a whole, or studies on a global level, which included at least one country of the region. We included only quantitative observational studies, which present results for the general population. Epidemiological studies based on medical records were also included when these stemmed from a representative number of hospitals in a country or from the leading hospitals in an urban area, that has a catchment area representative of the target population. In terms of outcome measures, we included studies using mortality counts as well as alternative population health metrics such as YLL or life expectancy. We excluded studies investigating morbidity effects only or those investigating indirect effects of temperature on mortality, for example through changes in crop yields, forest fires, droughts and water shortages, and others. We did not apply restrictions on the type or the timeframe of effects and exposure measures (e.g., year-round hot or cold temperatures, heat waves or cold spells). We included studies based on daily, weekly, monthly or annual temperatures, and those combining measures of temperature and humidity (apparent temperature, Humidex, Heat Index, Wet Bulb Globe Temperature, etc.). Since there is no standard definition of heat waves with respect to human health in the literature, we included all studies referring to heat wave episodes. We excluded studies looking only at seasonal effects on mortality without explicitly considering temperatures. Regarding types of study design, we considered time series studies, case-crossover studies as well as single episode analyses. Since the focus was on studies examining the quantitative association between ambient temperature and mortality, we excluded discussion articles, case studies, and articles featuring descriptive analysis only (See Table S2). After we combined the search results and removed duplicates, one of the reviewers (AD) screened all the titles and abstracts and assessed their relevance against the inclusion criteria (see Table S2). To validate these results a second reviewer (CT) screened a sample of 20% of all retrieved titles and abstracts. Independent judgment of the two reviewers differed for 0.3% of the titles and abstracts, but perfect agreement on which studies should be selected was reached through discussion. Two reviewers (AD and VI) separately assessed full texts for eligibility, based on the pre-defined inclusion and exclusion criteria. In the case of discrepancies, disagreements were resolved with the involvement of a third senior investigator (CT). 2.3. Data extraction Both investigators independently retrieved the main characteristics and results of the included studies using a standardised data extraction form. The following information was retrieved from each article: location and study period, study design, statistical methods and sensitivity analysis, inclusion of lagged effects, control of confounding and modifying factors, exposure and outcome measure(s) and their data source(s), observed temperature and humidity ranges, minimum mortality temperature (MMT), reported effect estimates, subgroup analysis, mortality displacement, key findings, and modeled or suggested adaptation strategies. We pilot tested the data extraction form to ensure accuracy and consistency during the entire process. Data collected by both reviewers were compared and any discrepancies were resolved through discussion and consensus. In several instances, study authors were contacted to obtain additional data necessary for the analysis or to clarify ambiguous information. 2.4. Assessment of evidence We assessed the quality and strength of the evidence separately for the association between ambient temperature and all-cause mortality and heat wave events and all-cause mortality following the Navigation A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 4 Guide framework (Johnson et al., 2014; Woodruff and Sutton, 2014). The Navigation Guide methodology has been specifically developed for the assessment of the quality and strength of the evidence of research in the environmental health field (Johnson et al., 2014). The assessment proceeded in three stages: i) rating the Risk of Bias (RoB) for each individual study, ii) rating the quality of the evidence across all studies, and iii) rating the strength, or certainty, of the evidence across all studies. 2.4.1. Assessment of the risk of bias in individual studies We assessed the quality of individual studies using the Office of Health Assessment and Translation (OHAT) Risk of Bias Rating Tool for Human and Animal Studies. Since OHAT does not specifically consider time series environmental health study designs, in collaboration with subject-matter experts (CT, XB, OR, JB) we adapted some of its domains to better tailor it to our research question (See Table S3). We evaluated each study against the following six domains of Risk of Bias (RoB): selection, confounding, exposure assessment, outcome assessment, selective reporting and other bias (appropriateness of statistical methods). For each of these possible sources of bias we rated the RoB as definitely low, probably low, probably high and definitely high. The rating scale is based on a conservative approach, where insufficient information to judge the risk of bias for specific domain results in a rating of probably high risk of bias. The two reviewers (AD, VI) independently performed the risk of bias assessment and discussed results with the other coauthors in case consensus could not be reached. Following the Navigation Guide Methodology, we considered an individual study to have a definitely low or probably low RoB if all domains of assessment were rated as definitely low or probably low. Due to the very limited number of studies the results of the RoB assessment were not used to exclude studies from the quantitative synthesis. 2.4.2. Assessment of the quality of the evidence across studies We rated the overall quality of the evidence for studies on ambient temperature and heat wave episodes separately. Rating categories included high, moderate, or low. Following the approach in the Navigation Guide, we initially rated the body of evidence as moderate and then “downgraded” or “upgraded” this rating based on eight factors. The downgrading factors included risk of bias across studies, indirectness, inconsistency, imprecision, publication bias, and the upgrading factors consisted of size of the effect, dose response pattern and possibility of confounding minimizing effects. We assessed the RoB across studies based on the RoB rating of individual studies, as outlined above. As recommended in the Navigation Guide, the RoB across studies was judged on the basis of each study, but with more weight placed on high quality studies. 2.4.3. Assessment of the strength of the evidence across studies We also rated the strength of the body of evidence, separately for ambient temperature and heat wave episodes, based on the following four considerations outlined in the Navigation Guide: i) quality of the body of evidence (i.e., rating from previous assessment stage), ii) direction of effect, iii) confidence in the effect (likelihood that a new study would change our conclusions) and iv) any other attributes of the data that might affect certainty. 2.5. Meta-analysis From the studies included in the review, we selected those that were sufficiently compatible in terms of study design, outcome and exposure measures, and lag structure, in order to conduct a meta-analysis of the association between temperature and mortality.