(2017) analysed annual (summer) mortality and occurrences of heat waves and heat wave days. The majority of articles considering continuous temperature effects (n = 11; 55%) used mean temperature as it was demonstrated to be a better predictor of the temperature-mortality relationship compared to maximum and minimum temperatures, or because it permitted better comparability with other studies. Several studies (n = 9; 45%) used maximum and minimum daily temperature, in some cases as a sensitivity analysis. Five articles evaluated the combined effect of other meteorological parameters such as humidity, wind speed, and mean radiant temperature with temperature by using an index (Heat Index, Universal Thermal Climate Index, Physiological Equivalent Temperature). Two studies also investigated the impact of temperature variability, i.e., the difference between daily maximum and minimum temperatures, or diurnal range. Excluding studies on heat waves, three of the selected articles limited their analysis to summer months and two to summer and winter months to isolate heat and cold effects. Also, the indices adopted by Nissan et al. (2017) incorporated relative humidity and day-time as well as night-time conditions. About 80% of the studies used data from local stations obtained from a national meteorological department. Two studies relied on climatic records from weather websites provided from the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) under the World Weather Watch Program, one from a weather website, whose exact source we could not trace, and four on data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which are collected from local airports. The period analysed in the time series studies ranged from several months to 49 years (Mazdiyasni et al. 2017). Different approaches were used to determine a threshold for hot and cold effects and to quantify the temperature-mortality association. In general, threshold values were determined based on a specific percentile of the temperature data, through visual inspection of the temperaturemortality plots, or using statistical procedures such as maximum likelihood estimation. Four of the studies on heat waves selected thresholds based on an existing national heat wave definition and four based on a specific percentile of the data. MMTs in the included studies were highly dependent on the temperature and mortality measures, the health outcome of interest, the statistical analysis (non-linear, semi-linear or linear models) and the considered lag structure. Therefore, it is difficult to draw comparisons of the threshold values across studies directly. For articles using mean daily temperature and all-cause daily death counts the temperature threshold values below which mortality started to rise ranged from 19 ◦C to 30 ◦C for lags 0–13 and lag 0–14 (cold effects). The threshold above which deaths started to increase ranged from 20 ◦C to 31 ◦C for lag 0–1 days (heat effects). Outcomes were reported using a variety of metrics such as relative risk (RR), odds ratio (OR), percentage change in mortality, regression coefficients, and probability of a certain number of deaths. As expected, there were wide variations in observed temperature ranges across studies and locations. For the articles reporting these, daily maximum temperatures varied between 37.8 ◦C and 46.2 ◦C (n = 9), daily minimum temperatures between 8.6 ◦C and 28.5 ◦C (n = 6) and daily mean temperatures were in the range of 13.2 ◦C and 35.6 ◦C (n = 10). These temperature ranges corresponded to the diverse climatic conditions in the region. Study locations covered eight main climatic zones based on the Koeppen-Geiger climate classification and were dominated by four main climatic zones: tropical wet and dry, humid subtropical, warm semi-arid and warm desert (see Fig. 3). Areas in the tropical zone, found along the southern parts of India and in Bangladesh, experience mostly hot summers and receive heavy rainfall during the monsoon periods. The humid subtropical zone, which spans the IndoGangetic plains, is also characterized by hot summers, but cooler winters. The warm semi-arid climate, found in some parts of India, tends to have hot summers and warm to cool winters, with very little precipitation. Finally, the warm desert climatic zone, found in the northern edge of India and most of Pakistan, is characterized by extreme temperature variations, with hot summers and cool or cold winters, and minimal precipitation. Concerning study design, articles evaluating the impact of heat and/ or cold on mortality were based either on time series or case-crossover design. As previously noted by Basu (2009) and demonstrated in several studies on temperature and mortality, study results should be similar irrespective of whether they are based on time series or casecrossover design. Studies investigating heat wave effects were based either on episode analysis, comparing deaths in a heat wave vs. matched non-heat wave period/days, or on time series analysis, regressing daily or annual mortality with heat wave/non-heat wave days or an annual number of heat waves. Most time series studies included season and time trend as confounding variables in their models, using smoothing functions with specified degrees of freedom, while several studies considered additional confounders such as day of the week, public holidays, humidity, rainfall, and particulate air pollution. Control for most of these confounders was not necessary for case-control/case crossover studies since they controlled for potential temporal confounders “by design”, i.e., by matching control days by day of the week and month across years. Also, in the case of case-crossover studies as well as time series controlling for trend, biases due to individual characteristics such as genetics, behaviours and physiological differences are also inherently accounted for by study design. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 17 The majority of included time series studies also examined harvesting and delayed effects of non-optimum temperature exposure and reported cumulative impacts over periods prior to the mortality event, with the considered lag structure ranging from a single day for high temperatures to 28 days for low temperatures. Harvesting or mortality displacement effects are characterised as excess mortality over the first few days of relatively high temperature being offset by reduced mortality in the following days of lower temperatures. Analysing harvesting is essential for determining the full magnitude of the public health issue, since its presence indicates that frail individuals were the only major population subgroup affected by the exposure and that their deaths were brought forward by a certain number of days (Gasparrini, Armstrong and Kenward, 2010; Hajat and Kosatky, 2010). 3.3. Assessment of the risk of bias in individual studies We found substantial variation in the quality of the included articles as shown in the summary table for all studies (Table 2) and in the summary tables for individual assessments (Supplementary Table S5S31). We identified measurement of exposure, measurement of outcome, and appropriateness of statistical method as the most common weakness in the quality of the body of evidence. In particular, twelve studies were judged to have definitely high or probably high risk of exposure measurement bias. These low ratings were related to the use of weekly or monthly temperature observations as opposed to daily time series, which might attenuate the true temperature effect or capture seasonal effects rather than true temperature effects, as well as large spatial aggregation of exposure data, which might conceal local temperature effects on mortality, and lack of sufficient information on data source and quality control of the data. Fourteen studies were rated as having a definitely high or probably high risk of measurement bias due to the use of data from unofficial sources with low reliability (e.g. newspapers, unofficial reports) or the use of municipal and vital registry data, which is considered as incomplete and under-representative for the countries in the region as large number of people die outside hospitals and without being registered (Setel et al., 2007; Jha, 2014; Mikkelsen et al., 2015). Seven of the studies were judged to have definitely high or probably high risk of bias for using an inappropriate statistical method. In most cases this was related to the use of statistical methods not appropriate for count data (e.g. OLS regression, Pearson correlation coefficient, ANOVA analysis, t-test, etc.) or inference of a causal association based on inappropriate study design or method. Four of the included studies were identified as being at probably high risk of selection bias. Eight of the studies did not control for some of the primary confounders (seasonality or time trend) or any confounders at all and were, therefore, rated as being at definitely high or probably high risk of confounding bias based on our assessment criteria. One study was evaluated as being at definitely high risk of bias due to inconsistencies in reporting. Seven of the overall 20 studies that examined risk of mortality with continuous exposure to ambient temperature, were judged to have definitely low or probably low risk of bias across all the risk of bias domains. In contrast, all the nine studies focusing on the mortality risk of heat wave episodes received probably high or definitely high risk of bias rating for one or more of the domains. 3.4. Synthesis of findings on primary research question 3.4.1. Synthesis of findings on temperature and all-cause mortality Included studies suggest that both hot and cold temperatures are associated with mortality in the South Asian population. However, results across studies were not homogenous in terms of the direction (increasing mortality with decreasing or increasing temperatures beyond cold and heat thresholds) and magnitude of effects. Furthermore, estimates from the meta-analysis confirm evidence of impacts for high temperatures only. From the eight studies, which analysed the susceptibility of rural populations to non-optimum temperature, six found an association between cold temperature and mortality, while five found a heat effect. All studies on urban areas apart from two focused solely on heat effects and showed evidence for heat-related mortality, while two documented both heat and cold-related mortality (McMichael et al., 2008; Singh et al., 2019). Burkart et al. (2011) specifically examined and contrasted the temperature effects for urban and rural areas in Bangladesh. Although they observed an increase in mortality at high and low temperatures for both rural and urban areas, urban areas were found to exhibit generally stronger and longer lasting heat effects. The other four studies (Burkart et al., 2014b; Burkart and Kinney, 2017; Fu et al., 2018; Shrestha et al., 2017), which examined the relationship between temperature and excess mortality at a national scale, also ascertained both heat and cold effects. Overall, studies in India found that substantial health impacts occur even at temperatures lower than those specified in the national heat wave definition. Results across studies also varied considerably in terms of the magnitude of the observed heat and cold effects.