Although the adverse impacts of ambient temperature on human health have been extensively documented in the literature, only a limited number of studies have focused on populations in this region. Objectives: Our aim was to systematically review the current state and quality of available evidence on the direct relationship between ambient temperature and heat waves and all-cause mortality in South Asia. Methods: The databases Pubmed, Web of Science, Scopus and Embase were searched from 1990 to 2020 for relevant observational quantitative studies. We applied the Navigation Guide methodology to assess the strength of the evidence and performed a meta-analysis based on a novel approach that allows for combining nonlinear exposure–response associations without access to data from individual studies. Results: From the 6,759 screened papers, 27 were included in the qualitative synthesis and five in a meta-analysis. Studies reported an association of all-cause mortality with heat wave episodes and both high and low daily temperatures. The meta-analysis showed a U-shaped pattern, with increasing mortality for both high and low temperatures, but a statistically significant association was found only at higher temperatures — above 31◦ C for lag 0–1 days and above 34◦ C for lag 0–13 days. Effects were found to vary with cause of death, age, sex, location (urban vs. rural), level of education and socio-economic status, but the profile of vulnerabilities was somewhat inconsistent and based on a limited number of studies. Overall, the strength of the evidence for ambient temperature as a risk factor for all-cause mortality was judged as limited and for heat wave episodes as inadequate. Conclusions: The evidence base on temperature impacts on mortality in South Asia is limited due to the small number of studies, their skewed geographical distribution and methodological weaknesses. Understanding the main determinants of the temperature-mortality association as well as how these may evolve in the future in a dynamic region such as South Asia will be an important area for future research. Studies on viable adaptation options to high temperatures for a region that is a hotspot for climate vulnerability, urbanisation and population growth are also needed. 1. Introduction Expected increases in temperature and the intensity and frequency of heat waves due to climate change have become a matter of growing public health concern (IPCC, 2014; Watts et al., 2017; Ebi et al., 2018; Maycock et al., 2018; Watts, 2019). Along with other climatic changes such as precipitation and atmospheric circulation patterns, temperature increases can affect human health and wellbeing through various pathways, including heat stress, increases in wildfires, spread of vectorborne and water-borne diseases, crop failure and its potential impact on food prices, nutrition, incomes, population displacement and conflict (Watts et al., 2017; Ebi, Campbell-Lendrum and Wyns, 2018). One of the most direct, and therefore, well-studied mechanisms through which changes in average weather impact human health is ambient temperature. An extensive body of epidemiological literature has documented the * Corresponding authors at: ISGlobal, Barcelona Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), Doctor Aiguader, 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail address: cathryn.tonne@isglobal.org (C. Tonne). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Environment International journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envint https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106170 Received 3 June 2020; Received in revised form 16 September 2020; Accepted 26 September 2020 Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 2 adverse impacts of ambient high and low temperatures and isolated events such as heat waves and cold spells (normally defined as a prolonged period of abnormally high/low temperatures, with the exact number of days and temperature thresholds varying by study design) on human health in terms of increases in cardiovascular (Moghadamnia et al., 2017), respiratory, and all-cause mortality (Oudin Åstr¨om, Bertil and Joacim, 2011; Yu et al., 2012; Ryti, Guo and Jaakkola, 2016), as well as increases in emergency department visits and hospital admissions (Mastrangelo et al., 2007; Phung et al., 2016). Most of these studies have been conducted in countries with temperate climates in the Global North (mostly North America and Europe) and more recently China (Chen, 2018; Han et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2014). Evidence on the relationship between temperature and health risks in lowand middleincome countries (LMICs) and hot climates, albeit growing, is still limited, even though the highest temperature increases and the global hotspots of population growth and urbanisation will occur there (IPCC, 2014; UNDESA, 2018; European Commission, Joint Research Centre, 2018). Although two recent reviews have summarised the body of literature on temperature and mortality for LMICs and tropical countries (Burkart et al., 2014a; Green et al., 2019), a comprehensive review on one of the most vulnerable geographical regions in the world — South Asia — is still lacking (Mora et al., 2017; Byers et al., 2018; Muthukumara et al., 2018). South Asia is recognised as being at high risk of climate impacts due to the combination of its climate and geography (occupying areas with high year-round temperatures and humidity), large and growing population, rapid urbanisation, relatively low adaptive capacity in terms of high levels of poverty and inequality, poor health infrastructure, scarcity of resources and livelihood dependence on agriculture, which implies large occupational exposure to outdoor temperature. With a population of about 1.8 billion (World Bank, 2019b), South Asia, which comprises Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka (World Bank definition), is the most densely populated and the second most populous region in the world (after East Asia&Pacific). The region accommodates the second highest number and proportion of people in extreme poverty (defined as living below $1 per day) (Islam, Newhouse, Yanez-Pagans, 2018) and 43% of its labour force works in agriculture (World Bank, 2019a). South Asia has a diverse geography and climate, covering the glaciated and sparsely populated regions of the Himalayas, Karakoram, and Hindu Kush mountain, with annual average temperatures around 0 ◦C, as well as vast tropical and sub-tropical regions, with annual temperatures averaging between 25 ◦C and 30 ◦C (Mani et al., 2018). Given these characteristics, both high and low temperatures are likely to affect population health. Similar to other regions, South Asia has experienced a clear and considerable upward trend in annual average temperatures, albeit unevenly distributed geographically. Most pronounced increases over the period 1950–2010 have been observed in Western Afghanistan and southwestern Pakistan, ranging from 1.0 ◦C to 3.0 ◦C. Within the same decades, average annual temperatures have shifted upward by 1.0 ◦C to 1.5 ◦C in Southeastern India, western Sri Lanka, northern Pakistan, and eastern Nepal (Mani et al., 2018). These trends are projected to continue in the future. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) indicates that, compared to the average in the 20th century, average annual temperatures in the region could rise by >2 ◦C over land by the mid-21st century, and exceed 3 ◦C over high latitudes, by the late 21st century under a high-emissions scenario (Carabine, 2014). Importantly, rising humidity, especially in regions with routinely warm and humid weather, can further amplify the health impacts of higher temperatures by compromising humańs’ ability to dissipate heat through sweating (Gosling et al., 2009; Im, Pal and Eltahir, 2017). The threat of aggravating heat is also reflected in the increasing death toll reported from extreme temperatures in the region according to the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT) (See Fig. 1). Some of the most notable historical episodes, which claimed thousands of human and livestock lives, include: the severe heat waves reported around Odisha (eastern India) in 1998, in Andhra Pradesh (2003), Ahmadabad (2010) and other parts of Gujarat (western India), the 2008 Afghanistan blizzard, and the more recent 2015 heat wave, which hit large parts of India and Pakistan, resulting in about 3500 deaths (Im, Pal and Eltahir, 2017). These figures are likely to be conservative and underestimate the total health burden of extreme heat, given the lack of official surveillance and misreporting. Furthermore, they do not capture the impact of moderate non-extreme temperatures, which are much more frequent, and therefore, contribute considerably to total heat and cold-related deaths (Gasparrini et al., 2015). Although geographic location, climate, and latitude are of crucial importance, the literature has shown the pattern and magnitude of temperature-mortality effects are also highly dependent on local contexts and strongly influenced by the interaction of non-atmospheric factors such as demographic, socio-economic, and lifestyle characteristics, underlying disease burdens of the population, features of the built environment, and others (Uejio et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2013; Zanobetti et al., 2013). For instance, it has been demonstrated that exposure–response functions can differ even for populations within the same geographic or climatic area (Michelozzi, 2006; Anderson & Bell, 2009; Hajat & Kosatky, 2010). It is also well known that populations are usually well adapted to the most frequent and/or moderate temperatures in their local climates, which explains higher thresholds for heat-related mortality in warmer climates and lower thresholds for cold-related mortality in colder climates (Gosling et al., 2009). Studies have also reported that exposure–response functions can change over time, highlighting the scope for adaptation and acclimatization (Hondula et al., 2015; Kinney, 2018a; Petkova et al., 2014). However, the speed at which adaptation is likely to take place and whether it can outpace future temperature changes are poorly understood. Furthermore, the scope of further acclimatization and adaptation for populations living in hot, and especially hot and humid climates, where heat adaptations and lifestyle modifications already exist, is likely to be more limited (Hanna and Tait, 2015). According to a climate simulation study, under the current business-as-usual trajectory of carbon emissions, by the end of the century some of the population in South Asia may experience hot and humid temperatures that exceed the “upper limit on human survivability “(Im, Pal and Eltahir, 2017). In this context, it has been argued that the population in the region might need to rely mainly on technological and behavioural adaptations in the future (Hanna and Tait, 2015). In the context of climate change and the vulnerabilities in South Asia it is crucial to provide a comprehensive analysis on the region-specific Fig. 1. Deaths from extreme temperature events in South Asia. Source: Own figure, EM-DAT database* (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters CRED, 2019) *The data in the database are compiled from various sources, including UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, insurance companies, research institutes and press agencies. An extreme event is considered in the database only if >10 fatalities were reported. Annotations of major heat and cold events in the figure are added by the authors. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 3 temperature-mortality effects in order to guide adaptation planning, inform targeted health interventions, and support sound and evidencebased health impact projections. To address this need and to establish the state of the available evidence, identify knowledge gaps, and highlight future research directions, we systematically reviewed the existing literature on temperature-related mortality in South Asia. Through a systematic review and a meta-analysis we investigated the following hypothesis: “Are ambient temperature (high and low), and heat wave events associated with increased all-cause mortality in the general population in South Asia?”. We developed a “Population”, “Exposure”, “Comparator”, and “Outcomes” and “study design” (PECOs) statement as follows: ▪ Population: the general population in South Asia (as defined by the World Bank in August 2018: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka) ▪ Exposure: high and low ambient temperatures (defined as daily/weekly/monthly/annual mean/max/min temperatures or a composite index of temperature and other weather variable) and heat wave events. ▪ Comparators: A comparable population not exposed to the same temperature or heat wave event or the same population at a time when it was not exposed to the same ambient temperature or heat wave event. ▪ Outcome: all-cause or cause-specific mortality, Years of Life Lost (YLL), changes in life expectancy ▪ Study design: quantitative observational studies We also perform more narrative review on the following exploratory research questions: i) “Are ambient temperatures (high and low), and heat wave events associated with increased cause-specific mortality in the general population in South Asia?”, ii) Are certain population groups at higher risk of mortality from exposure to ambient temperature?”, iii) At what time lags do temperature effects on mortality occur for the population in South Asia?” We add to previous systematic reviews conducted for tropical regions (Burkart et al., 2014a), LMICs (Green et al., 2019) and India (Salve et al., 2018) by covering both effects from heat wave episodes and ambient temperature, assessing the strength and quality of the body of evidence, and including a meta-analysis of exposure–response functions based on a novel approach that allows combining nonlinear exposure–response associations without access to data from individual studies. We also identify key areas for future research. 2. Methods 2.1.