(2005b) demonstrated more sustained risks for children and non-respiratory diseases. Babalola et al. (2018), who considered monthly infant mortality, found evidence for cold effects for lag 0 months. None of the five studies, which focused on mortality related to heat waves, formally modeled delayed effects of exposure. Azhar et al. (2014) assessed possible delayed effects graphically but did not find any evidence for these. Considering this methodological shortcoming, one cannot exclude that the reported excess mortality in the included heat wave studies represents, at least to a certain extent, a harvesting effect rather than a substantial increase in mortality. However, it has been shown that the more extreme weather events are, the smaller the harvesting effect is (Saha, Davis and Hondula, 2014). 3.5.3. Vulnerable populations The identification of specific segments of the population most vulnerable to non-optimum temperatures has been of specific interest in most of the included studies as in climate-related research in general. However, results across studies do not provide a homogenous picture regarding vulnerabilities, and this is true even for studies based on the same population, but using different study design and/or statistical method. Most of the reviewed studies explored only vulnerabilities based on age and sex and cause of death, possibly due to the lack of sufficient data on socio-economic and other characteristics. Only Burkart et al. (2014) and Ingole et al. (2017) also analysed differences due to other individual or intra-population characteristics such as socioeconomic status, education, occupation, housing, or level of urbanisation. Cold effects have been shown to be most pronounced among infants and children younger than 5 years (Ingole et al., 2012; Babalola et al., 2018) or <15 years (Hashizume, 2009), the elderly (Lindeboom et al., 2012; Ingole et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2018), adults aged 20–69 (Alam et al., 2012; Fu et al., 2018), and those employed in housework (Ingole et al., 2017). Alam et al. (2012) found cold to exert a stronger effect on females, while Ingole et al. (2017, 2012) and Singh et al. (2019) did not find any gender differences. Stronger heat effects were demonstrated for children aged 0–14 (Hajat et al., 2005; Sewe et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2019), adults aged 20–59 (Ingole et al., 2012) and the elderly (Burkart et al., 2014b; Singh et al., 2019). However, no such association was found by Ingole et al. (2015) for the elderly (60 and older) in Vadu HDSS. Burkart et al. (2014) and Ingole et al. (2015) showed that males in Bangladesh, particularly the elderly, and males in Vadu HDSS appear to face increased mortality risk on hot days. However, Ingole et al. (2017) demonstrated the opposite for women in Vadu (results were not statistically significant), and Ingole et al. (2012) did not find any significant association by gender. In terms of socio-economic factors, findings from Burkart et al. (2014) suggest a more pronounced risk of heat-related allcause mortality for people living in urban and in high socio-economic status areas, especially among the elderly, as compared to rural and low socio-economic status areas. The higher heat-related risks for urban areas in Bangladesh were also demonstrated in a previous study by Burkart et al. (2011). Singh et al. (2019) report higher mortality for noninstitutional deaths (those dying outside a hospital) compared to institutional deaths (those dying within a hospital), which the authors broadly attribute to lower socio-economic status. In a study conducted at the individual level in a rural setting in western India, stronger heat effects were observed among farmers, those with low educational attainment as well as those owing more agricultural land (Ingole et al., 2012). Only a few studies on heat wave episodes investigated the role of non-atmospheric factors on the temperature-mortality relationship. Both Azhar et al. (2014) and Singh et al. (2019) report a higher RR of Fig. 4. Pooled estimates of the temperature-all-cause mortality association at (A) lag 0–1 days and (B) lag 0–13 days. Studies included in the meta-analysis: Burkart and Kinney (2017), Fu et al. (2018), Hashizume et al. (2009), Ingole et al. (2017), McMichael et al. (2008). A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 21 mortality from heat waves for females compared to males. Analysis of the deadly heat wave in Karachi, Pakistan during 2015, revealed excess risk of heat-related mortality among the poor and those with lower levels of education, but no effect of fasting during Ramadan was found as initially hypothesised. 3.6. Quality of the evidence Table 3 summarizes the overall quality of the evidence on the association between ambient temperature and heat wave episodes and allcause mortality for the general population in the countries in South Asia. We downgraded the overall quality of the evidence for studies on ambient temperature by the criterion on imprecision as several studies had large confidence intervals and two did not report any confidence intervals. We downgraded the overall quality of the evidence for studies on heat wave episodes for three of the criteria: risk of bias – due to the substantial risk of bias across studies, indirectness – due to ambiguity of outcome definition and imprecision – due to several studies having large confidence intervals and one not reporting any confidence intervals. We upgraded the quality of the evidence on ambient temperature since most studies reported a broadly consistent dose–response pattern, with risk of mortality increasing with increases and decreases of ambient temperatures beyond a certain threshold. The resulting overall quality of the evidence was judged as moderate for studies on ambient temperature and low for studies on heat wave episodes. 3.7. Strength of the evidence Table 3 also summarizes the rating of the strength of the body of evidence. Our judgements were based on the following considerations: ● Quality of the body of evidence: moderate for studies on ambient temperature and low for studies on heat waves (as explained above). ● Direction of effect estimates was largely as expected – risk of mortality increasing with higher and lower ambient temperature beyond a threshold and with more frequent or intense heat wave episodes. ● Confidence in effect estimate: unlikely that a new study on ambient temperature and all-cause mortality would have an effect estimate that would make the results null or statistically insignificant. For heat wave exposure, due to the methodological deficiencies of the studies it cannot be ruled out that new studies might show different effects. ● Other compelling attributes of the data that may influence certainty: for ambient temperature studies, differences in exposure measurement, statistical methods, and contextual factors (completeness in mortality counts, population exposure level, vulnerability and physical and physiological adaptation) make interpretation and comparison difficult.