Along with other climatic changes such as precipitation and atmospheric circulation patterns, temperature increases can affect human health and wellbeing through various pathways, including heat stress, increases in wildfires, spread of vectorborne and water-borne diseases, crop failure and its potential impact on food prices, nutrition, incomes, population displacement and conflict (Watts et al., 2017; Ebi, Campbell-Lendrum and Wyns, 2018). One of the most direct, and therefore, well-studied mechanisms through which changes in average weather impact human health is ambient temperature. An extensive body of epidemiological literature has documented the * Corresponding authors at: ISGlobal, Barcelona Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), Doctor Aiguader, 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail address: cathryn.tonne@isglobal.org (C. Tonne). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Environment International journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/envint https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106170 Received 3 June 2020; Received in revised form 16 September 2020; Accepted 26 September 2020 Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 2 adverse impacts of ambient high and low temperatures and isolated events such as heat waves and cold spells (normally defined as a prolonged period of abnormally high/low temperatures, with the exact number of days and temperature thresholds varying by study design) on human health in terms of increases in cardiovascular (Moghadamnia et al., 2017), respiratory, and all-cause mortality (Oudin Åstr¨om, Bertil and Joacim, 2011; Yu et al., 2012; Ryti, Guo and Jaakkola, 2016), as well as increases in emergency department visits and hospital admissions (Mastrangelo et al., 2007; Phung et al., 2016). Most of these studies have been conducted in countries with temperate climates in the Global North (mostly North America and Europe) and more recently China (Chen, 2018; Han et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2014). Evidence on the relationship between temperature and health risks in lowand middleincome countries (LMICs) and hot climates, albeit growing, is still limited, even though the highest temperature increases and the global hotspots of population growth and urbanisation will occur there (IPCC, 2014; UNDESA, 2018; European Commission, Joint Research Centre, 2018). Although two recent reviews have summarised the body of literature on temperature and mortality for LMICs and tropical countries (Burkart et al., 2014a; Green et al., 2019), a comprehensive review on one of the most vulnerable geographical regions in the world — South Asia — is still lacking (Mora et al., 2017; Byers et al., 2018; Muthukumara et al., 2018). South Asia is recognised as being at high risk of climate impacts due to the combination of its climate and geography (occupying areas with high year-round temperatures and humidity), large and growing population, rapid urbanisation, relatively low adaptive capacity in terms of high levels of poverty and inequality, poor health infrastructure, scarcity of resources and livelihood dependence on agriculture, which implies large occupational exposure to outdoor temperature. With a population of about 1.8 billion (World Bank, 2019b), South Asia, which comprises Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka (World Bank definition), is the most densely populated and the second most populous region in the world (after East Asia&Pacific). The region accommodates the second highest number and proportion of people in extreme poverty (defined as living below $1 per day) (Islam, Newhouse, Yanez-Pagans, 2018) and 43% of its labour force works in agriculture (World Bank, 2019a). South Asia has a diverse geography and climate, covering the glaciated and sparsely populated regions of the Himalayas, Karakoram, and Hindu Kush mountain, with annual average temperatures around 0 ◦C, as well as vast tropical and sub-tropical regions, with annual temperatures averaging between 25 ◦C and 30 ◦C (Mani et al., 2018). Given these characteristics, both high and low temperatures are likely to affect population health. Similar to other regions, South Asia has experienced a clear and considerable upward trend in annual average temperatures, albeit unevenly distributed geographically. Most pronounced increases over the period 1950–2010 have been observed in Western Afghanistan and southwestern Pakistan, ranging from 1.0 ◦C to 3.0 ◦C. Within the same decades, average annual temperatures have shifted upward by 1.0 ◦C to 1.5 ◦C in Southeastern India, western Sri Lanka, northern Pakistan, and eastern Nepal (Mani et al., 2018). These trends are projected to continue in the future. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) indicates that, compared to the average in the 20th century, average annual temperatures in the region could rise by >2 ◦C over land by the mid-21st century, and exceed 3 ◦C over high latitudes, by the late 21st century under a high-emissions scenario (Carabine, 2014). Importantly, rising humidity, especially in regions with routinely warm and humid weather, can further amplify the health impacts of higher temperatures by compromising humańs’ ability to dissipate heat through sweating (Gosling et al., 2009; Im, Pal and Eltahir, 2017). The threat of aggravating heat is also reflected in the increasing death toll reported from extreme temperatures in the region according to the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT) (See Fig. 1). Some of the most notable historical episodes, which claimed thousands of human and livestock lives, include: the severe heat waves reported around Odisha (eastern India) in 1998, in Andhra Pradesh (2003), Ahmadabad (2010) and other parts of Gujarat (western India), the 2008 Afghanistan blizzard, and the more recent 2015 heat wave, which hit large parts of India and Pakistan, resulting in about 3500 deaths (Im, Pal and Eltahir, 2017). These figures are likely to be conservative and underestimate the total health burden of extreme heat, given the lack of official surveillance and misreporting. Furthermore, they do not capture the impact of moderate non-extreme temperatures, which are much more frequent, and therefore, contribute considerably to total heat and cold-related deaths (Gasparrini et al., 2015). Although geographic location, climate, and latitude are of crucial importance, the literature has shown the pattern and magnitude of temperature-mortality effects are also highly dependent on local contexts and strongly influenced by the interaction of non-atmospheric factors such as demographic, socio-economic, and lifestyle characteristics, underlying disease burdens of the population, features of the built environment, and others (Uejio et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2013; Zanobetti et al., 2013). For instance, it has been demonstrated that exposure–response functions can differ even for populations within the same geographic or climatic area (Michelozzi, 2006; Anderson & Bell, 2009; Hajat & Kosatky, 2010). It is also well known that populations are usually well adapted to the most frequent and/or moderate temperatures in their local climates, which explains higher thresholds for heat-related mortality in warmer climates and lower thresholds for cold-related mortality in colder climates (Gosling et al., 2009). Studies have also reported that exposure–response functions can change over time, highlighting the scope for adaptation and acclimatization (Hondula et al., 2015; Kinney, 2018a; Petkova et al., 2014). However, the speed at which adaptation is likely to take place and whether it can outpace future temperature changes are poorly understood. Furthermore, the scope of further acclimatization and adaptation for populations living in hot, and especially hot and humid climates, where heat adaptations and lifestyle modifications already exist, is likely to be more limited (Hanna and Tait, 2015). According to a climate simulation study, under the current business-as-usual trajectory of carbon emissions, by the end of the century some of the population in South Asia may experience hot and humid temperatures that exceed the “upper limit on human survivability “(Im, Pal and Eltahir, 2017). In this context, it has been argued that the population in the region might need to rely mainly on technological and behavioural adaptations in the future (Hanna and Tait, 2015). In the context of climate change and the vulnerabilities in South Asia it is crucial to provide a comprehensive analysis on the region-specific Fig. 1. Deaths from extreme temperature events in South Asia. Source: Own figure, EM-DAT database* (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters CRED, 2019) *The data in the database are compiled from various sources, including UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, insurance companies, research institutes and press agencies. An extreme event is considered in the database only if >10 fatalities were reported. Annotations of major heat and cold events in the figure are added by the authors. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 3 temperature-mortality effects in order to guide adaptation planning, inform targeted health interventions, and support sound and evidencebased health impact projections. To address this need and to establish the state of the available evidence, identify knowledge gaps, and highlight future research directions, we systematically reviewed the existing literature on temperature-related mortality in South Asia. Through a systematic review and a meta-analysis we investigated the following hypothesis: “Are ambient temperature (high and low), and heat wave events associated with increased all-cause mortality in the general population in South Asia?”. We developed a “Population”, “Exposure”, “Comparator”, and “Outcomes” and “study design” (PECOs) statement as follows: ▪ Population: the general population in South Asia (as defined by the World Bank in August 2018: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka) ▪ Exposure: high and low ambient temperatures (defined as daily/weekly/monthly/annual mean/max/min temperatures or a composite index of temperature and other weather variable) and heat wave events. ▪ Comparators: A comparable population not exposed to the same temperature or heat wave event or the same population at a time when it was not exposed to the same ambient temperature or heat wave event. ▪ Outcome: all-cause or cause-specific mortality, Years of Life Lost (YLL), changes in life expectancy ▪ Study design: quantitative observational studies We also perform more narrative review on the following exploratory research questions: i) “Are ambient temperatures (high and low), and heat wave events associated with increased cause-specific mortality in the general population in South Asia?”, ii) Are certain population groups at higher risk of mortality from exposure to ambient temperature?”, iii) At what time lags do temperature effects on mortality occur for the population in South Asia?” We add to previous systematic reviews conducted for tropical regions (Burkart et al., 2014a), LMICs (Green et al., 2019) and India (Salve et al., 2018) by covering both effects from heat wave episodes and ambient temperature, assessing the strength and quality of the body of evidence, and including a meta-analysis of exposure–response functions based on a novel approach that allows combining nonlinear exposure–response associations without access to data from individual studies. We also identify key areas for future research. 2. Methods 2.1. Search strategy We performed a systematic search of four electronic databases - Pubmed, Web of Science, Scopus, Embase – in order to identify epidemiological studies examining the direct relationship between ambient temperature and all-cause and cause-specific mortality in South Asia. We restricted the search to peer-reviewed articles published in English between January 1990 and August 2020. The search was initially run on 16 August 2018, and later updated on 13 August 2020. The systematic review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines and was based on a registered review protocol accessible online (PROSPERO CRD42018105730) (Dimitrova and Tonne, 2018). To ensure that all relevant articles were identified, we screened bibliographic reference lists of all included studies manually. Example of an exact electronic search strategy is provided in Supplementary Table S1. 2.2. Selection of studies We considered peer-reviewed studies published since 1990 in English, which examined any of the eight countries in the region as defined by the World Bank in August 2018 (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka), South Asia as a whole, or studies on a global level, which included at least one country of the region. We included only quantitative observational studies, which present results for the general population. Epidemiological studies based on medical records were also included when these stemmed from a representative number of hospitals in a country or from the leading hospitals in an urban area, that has a catchment area representative of the target population. In terms of outcome measures, we included studies using mortality counts as well as alternative population health metrics such as YLL or life expectancy. We excluded studies investigating morbidity effects only or those investigating indirect effects of temperature on mortality, for example through changes in crop yields, forest fires, droughts and water shortages, and others. We did not apply restrictions on the type or the timeframe of effects and exposure measures (e.g., year-round hot or cold temperatures, heat waves or cold spells). We included studies based on daily, weekly, monthly or annual temperatures, and those combining measures of temperature and humidity (apparent temperature, Humidex, Heat Index, Wet Bulb Globe Temperature, etc.). Since there is no standard definition of heat waves with respect to human health in the literature, we included all studies referring to heat wave episodes. We excluded studies looking only at seasonal effects on mortality without explicitly considering temperatures. Regarding types of study design, we considered time series studies, case-crossover studies as well as single episode analyses. Since the focus was on studies examining the quantitative association between ambient temperature and mortality, we excluded discussion articles, case studies, and articles featuring descriptive analysis only (See Table S2).