(2014) General population Four states in India: Delhi, Rajasthan, Heat wave episodes 1997–2009 Annual Time series analysis OLS regression NA NA Annual number of severe heat wave days (HWD) Heat wave definition: If the maximum Heat wave-induced mortality (number of deaths not reported) Mortality records, Positive significant association (90% CI) between annual mortality rates and annual number of (continued on next page) A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 15 Table 1 (continued) Reference Methods Exposure Outcome Main findings Study population and location Category of effect Study period Study design and statistical method Lag structure Control variables (confounders and effect modifiers) Measure and source Measure and source Maharashtra and Orissa temperature of a day exceeds 45◦ C, irrespective of the normal maximum temperature of a region, that day is defined as a severe HWD. In case a day’s maximum temperature is<45◦ C, that day is defined as a severe HWD when (1) the day’s maximum temperature is at least 7◦ C greater than the normal temperature, and (2) the maximum temperature of that day is above 40◦ C. Three different heat wave properties are characterised: (i) severe heat wave intensity, (ii) duration and (iii) frequency India Meteorological Department obtained from the Ministry of Home Affairs (Government of India) severe HWDs is found for Delhi (3.1, SE: +/-1.45), Rajasthan (5.6, SE:+/-1.46), and Maharashtra (2.3, SE:+/-1.46). Nissan et al. (2017) General population Bangladesh Heat wave episodes 1989–2011 Time series analysis Generalized additive regression models NA NA Daily max temperature, max and min day-andnight temperature, daily max heat index, daily max and min heat index, daily average temperature, average heat index Heat wave definition: Definitions of six heat wave indices are proposed and assessed, incorporating a range of conditions known to be important for heat stress: dayand nighttimes temperatures, humidity, and duration. According to all indices, a heat-wave day is declared on the third consecutive day on which one (or two) variables exceed the 95th percentile of daily values. [Calculated according to the formulation used by the U.S. National Weather Service] Bangladesh Meteorological Department All-cause mortality, excluding maternal and accidental deaths (n = 25,223) ICDRR, B́s Sample Vital Registration System (SVRS) in Bangladesh All proposed indices are a statistically significant predictor of mortality in Bangladesh, with effect estimates ranging between 10.4% and 24.0% increase in mortality during heat wave vs. non-heat wave days. The study findings recommend using the day-and-night index, which defines a heat wave as elevated dayand night-time temperatures above the 95th percentile for 3 consecutive days (22.3% increase in mortality, CI: 8.2, 38.2). The proposed definition is deemed appropriate for preparedness measures in a heat early warning system (HEWS) because it is both related to human health outcomes and forecastable. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 16 mortality (Ghumman and Horney, 2016). In terms of geographical coverage, 63% (n = 17) of the selected studies focused on India, eight on Bangladesh and one on Pakistan and Nepal, respectively. It is important to note that no epidemiological studies on the association between ambient temperature and mortality were identified for half of the countries in the region, namely Afghanistan, Bhutan, Maldives, and Sri Lanka. Eight of the studies included in this review (30%) focused solely on rural populations and eleven (40.7%) on urban, while eight studies (30%) evaluated the association between ambient temperature or heat waves and mortality for the general population in a country (including urban and rural areas). All the included studies on ambient temperature and heat waves are summarised in Table 1. In total, the included studies analysed >1.5 million deaths. However, eleven (41%) of the selected articles were based on identical populations, analysed over the same or an overlapping period. The most extensive datasets were provided by the Matlab́s Health and Demographic Surveillance System (HDSS) (around 49 thousand deaths), which is the oldest field site in the region dating back to 1966 and maintained by the International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDRR,B), and India’s Million Death Study (around 412 thousand deaths), which is based on one of the largest Sample Vital Registration Systems (SVRS) in the world. Other data sources included several smaller HDSSs, ICDRR,Bs SVRS in Bangladesh, inpatient hospital records, death records from municipal registrars and heat-related mortality statistics compiled by the IMD. Apart from all-cause mortality, eight studies reported effects of temperature on cause-specific mortality, with the most commonly examined causes being cardiovascular, respiratory, and infectious disease mortality. Outcomes related to perinatal mortality, ischemic heart disease, cancer, malaria, parasitic, vectorborne and water-borne diseases, and external causes were also assessed. Some studies on heat waves analysed specifically heatattributable deaths (Murari et al., 2015; Ghumman and Horney, 2016; Mazdiyasni et al., 2017) Most selected articles (n = 24; 89%) examined the effects of shortterm variations of temperature on mortality, thus measuring heat and/ or cold exposure as daily temperature. However, several studies applied a different timeframe for assessing temperature-mortality effects: Alam et al. (2012) analysed effects based on weekly mean temperature “to minimise fluctuations due to small number” of observations, Babalola et al. (2018) used monthly mean and maximum temperature as a unit of analysis to investigate effects on infant and child mortality, while Murari et al. (2015) and Mazdiyasni et al. (2017) analysed annual (summer) mortality and occurrences of heat waves and heat wave days. The majority of articles considering continuous temperature effects (n = 11; 55%) used mean temperature as it was demonstrated to be a better predictor of the temperature-mortality relationship compared to maximum and minimum temperatures, or because it permitted better comparability with other studies. Several studies (n = 9; 45%) used maximum and minimum daily temperature, in some cases as a sensitivity analysis. Five articles evaluated the combined effect of other meteorological parameters such as humidity, wind speed, and mean radiant temperature with temperature by using an index (Heat Index, Universal Thermal Climate Index, Physiological Equivalent Temperature). Two studies also investigated the impact of temperature variability, i.e., the difference between daily maximum and minimum temperatures, or diurnal range. Excluding studies on heat waves, three of the selected articles limited their analysis to summer months and two to summer and winter months to isolate heat and cold effects. Also, the indices adopted by Nissan et al. (2017) incorporated relative humidity and day-time as well as night-time conditions. About 80% of the studies used data from local stations obtained from a national meteorological department. Two studies relied on climatic records from weather websites provided from the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) under the World Weather Watch Program, one from a weather website, whose exact source we could not trace, and four on data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which are collected from local airports. The period analysed in the time series studies ranged from several months to 49 years (Mazdiyasni et al. 2017). Different approaches were used to determine a threshold for hot and cold effects and to quantify the temperature-mortality association. In general, threshold values were determined based on a specific percentile of the temperature data, through visual inspection of the temperaturemortality plots, or using statistical procedures such as maximum likelihood estimation. Four of the studies on heat waves selected thresholds based on an existing national heat wave definition and four based on a specific percentile of the data. MMTs in the included studies were highly dependent on the temperature and mortality measures, the health outcome of interest, the statistical analysis (non-linear, semi-linear or linear models) and the considered lag structure. Therefore, it is difficult to draw comparisons of the threshold values across studies directly. For articles using mean daily temperature and all-cause daily death counts the temperature threshold values below which mortality started to rise ranged from 19 ◦C to 30 ◦C for lags 0–13 and lag 0–14 (cold effects). The threshold above which deaths started to increase ranged from 20 ◦C to 31 ◦C for lag 0–1 days (heat effects). Outcomes were reported using a variety of metrics such as relative risk (RR), odds ratio (OR), percentage change in mortality, regression coefficients, and probability of a certain number of deaths. As expected, there were wide variations in observed temperature ranges across studies and locations. For the articles reporting these, daily maximum temperatures varied between 37.8 ◦C and 46.2 ◦C (n = 9), daily minimum temperatures between 8.6 ◦C and 28.5 ◦C (n = 6) and daily mean temperatures were in the range of 13.2 ◦C and 35.6 ◦C (n = 10). These temperature ranges corresponded to the diverse climatic conditions in the region. Study locations covered eight main climatic zones based on the Koeppen-Geiger climate classification and were dominated by four main climatic zones: tropical wet and dry, humid subtropical, warm semi-arid and warm desert (see Fig. 3). Areas in the tropical zone, found along the southern parts of India and in Bangladesh, experience mostly hot summers and receive heavy rainfall during the monsoon periods. The humid subtropical zone, which spans the IndoGangetic plains, is also characterized by hot summers, but cooler winters. The warm semi-arid climate, found in some parts of India, tends to have hot summers and warm to cool winters, with very little precipitation. Finally, the warm desert climatic zone, found in the northern edge of India and most of Pakistan, is characterized by extreme temperature variations, with hot summers and cool or cold winters, and minimal precipitation. Concerning study design, articles evaluating the impact of heat and/ or cold on mortality were based either on time series or case-crossover design. As previously noted by Basu (2009) and demonstrated in several studies on temperature and mortality, study results should be similar irrespective of whether they are based on time series or casecrossover design. Studies investigating heat wave effects were based either on episode analysis, comparing deaths in a heat wave vs. matched non-heat wave period/days, or on time series analysis, regressing daily or annual mortality with heat wave/non-heat wave days or an annual number of heat waves. Most time series studies included season and time trend as confounding variables in their models, using smoothing functions with specified degrees of freedom, while several studies considered additional confounders such as day of the week, public holidays, humidity, rainfall, and particulate air pollution. Control for most of these confounders was not necessary for case-control/case crossover studies since they controlled for potential temporal confounders “by design”, i.e., by matching control days by day of the week and month across years.