A heat effect on cardiovascular mortality was only observed in urban areas. Fu et al. (2018) General population India Heat and cold effects (continuous temperature) 2001–2013 Case-crossover study, DLNM Lag 0–21 days (cumulative) Potential temporal confounders and time-invariant confounders controlled for “by design” Daily mean temperature India Meteorological Department All-cause mortality at all ages, excluding injury and ill-defined medical causes (n = 411,613) and cause-specific mortality (ischemic heart disease, respiratory diseases, malaria and cancer among adults aged 30–69) India’s Million Death Study, Sample Registration System, Registrar General of India For all medical causes and ages, moderately cold temperature was associated with a higher attributable risk (OR) (6.3%, 95% CI: 1.1, 11.1) than extremely cold, moderately hot, and extremely hot temperatures, each of which were<0.6%. The risk related to moderately cold temperature was most pronounced for the population aged 30–69 years and 70 + . For cause-specific deaths at ages 30–69 years, moderately cold temperature was associated with attributable risks of 27.2% (95% CI: 11.4, 40.2) for stroke, 9.7% (95% CI: 3.7 to 15.3) for IHD, and 6.5% (95% CI: 3.5, 9.2) for respiratory diseases. Burkart and Kinney (2017) General population Bangladesh Cold effects (continuous temperature and seasonal temperature) 2003–2007 Time series analysis, Poisson GAM and Poisson DLNM Lag 0–1 days, lag 0–2 days, lag 0–4 days, lag 0–7 days, lag 0–14 days and lag 0–21 days (cumulative) Time trend, season, day of the month Daily mean temperature, daily max temperature, daily min temperature, diurnal temperature range (DTR) Bangladesh Meteorological Department All-cause mortality, excluding external causes and maternity-related deaths (n = 25, 226) ICDRR, B́s SVRS in Bangladesh During the winter season, mortality increased with 1.7% (95% CI = 0.86–2.54%) per 1 ◦C decrease in temperature (lag 0–1 days). Heat effects observed during the summer (continued on next page) A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 14 Table 1 (continued) Reference Methods Exposure Outcome Main findings Study population and location Category of effect Study period Study design and statistical method Lag structure Control variables (confounders and effect modifiers) Measure and source Measure and source season were stronger than over the entire year. Shrestha et al. (2017) General population Nepal Heat and cold effects (continuous variable) 2009–2014 Time series analysis Generalized linear model (GLM) with log link function (Poisson model) 3-day prior moving average for all-cause mortality; 7-day geometrical decay effect for waterand vectorborne mortality Seasonal dummy variables, day of week (Saturday) and secular trend, humidity, wind [for all-cause mortality]; wind, time trend [for waterand vectorborne mortality] Daily average temperature weekly data of the number of days of occurrence of extreme events Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM), Kathmandu, 16 meteorological stations in the country All-cause mortality (n = 10,000) and cause-specific mortality (vector-bore and water-borne diseases) inpatient records from 22 hospitals in Nepal All-cause mortality increased by 1.4% per 1 ◦C increase in the absolute difference of average temperature with its overall average (20 ◦C) (3-day prior moving average) (parameter estimate: 0.014, 95% CI: 0.002, 0.026). All-cause mortality also increased with decreasing temperature relative to overall average condition (20 ◦C). Mortality from water-borne and vector-borne diseases increased by 3.7% per 1 ◦C rise in daily average temperature (7-day geometrical decay effect). Association between mortality from water-borne and vector-borne diseases and extremely cold days (<4.6 ◦C) was also reported, as well as between mortality from water borne and renal diseases and extremely hot days (above 95 percentile of maximum temperature). Mazdiyasni et al. (2017) General population India Heat wave episodes 1960–2009 Annual time series analysis Correlation analysis, KolmogorovSmirnov test; Man-Kendall Test and Conditional probabilistic model NA NA Daily mean and max temperature (summer months) Heat wave definition: Three or more consecutive days of temperatures above the 85th percentile of the hottest month for each specific location. Four different heatwave properties are assessed: (i) accumulated heatwave intensity, (ii) annual heatwave count, (iii) mean heatwave duration, and (iv) heatwave days. India Meteorological Department heat-related mortality (n = 10, 619) India Meteorological Department, annual reports The increase in summer mean temperature in India over 1960–2009 corresponds to a 146% increase in the probability of heat-related mortality events of >100 people. Murari et al. (2014) General population Four states in India: Delhi, Rajasthan, Heat wave episodes 1997–2009 Annual Time series analysis OLS regression NA NA Annual number of severe heat wave days (HWD) Heat wave definition: If the maximum Heat wave-induced mortality (number of deaths not reported) Mortality records, Positive significant association (90% CI) between annual mortality rates and annual number of (continued on next page) A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 15 Table 1 (continued) Reference Methods Exposure Outcome Main findings Study population and location Category of effect Study period Study design and statistical method Lag structure Control variables (confounders and effect modifiers) Measure and source Measure and source Maharashtra and Orissa temperature of a day exceeds 45◦ C, irrespective of the normal maximum temperature of a region, that day is defined as a severe HWD. In case a day’s maximum temperature is<45◦ C, that day is defined as a severe HWD when (1) the day’s maximum temperature is at least 7◦ C greater than the normal temperature, and (2) the maximum temperature of that day is above 40◦ C. Three different heat wave properties are characterised: (i) severe heat wave intensity, (ii) duration and (iii) frequency India Meteorological Department obtained from the Ministry of Home Affairs (Government of India) severe HWDs is found for Delhi (3.1, SE: +/-1.45), Rajasthan (5.6, SE:+/-1.46), and Maharashtra (2.3, SE:+/-1.46). Nissan et al. (2017) General population Bangladesh Heat wave episodes 1989–2011 Time series analysis Generalized additive regression models NA NA Daily max temperature, max and min day-andnight temperature, daily max heat index, daily max and min heat index, daily average temperature, average heat index Heat wave definition: Definitions of six heat wave indices are proposed and assessed, incorporating a range of conditions known to be important for heat stress: dayand nighttimes temperatures, humidity, and duration. According to all indices, a heat-wave day is declared on the third consecutive day on which one (or two) variables exceed the 95th percentile of daily values. [Calculated according to the formulation used by the U.S. National Weather Service] Bangladesh Meteorological Department All-cause mortality, excluding maternal and accidental deaths (n = 25,223) ICDRR, B́s Sample Vital Registration System (SVRS) in Bangladesh All proposed indices are a statistically significant predictor of mortality in Bangladesh, with effect estimates ranging between 10.4% and 24.0% increase in mortality during heat wave vs. non-heat wave days. The study findings recommend using the day-and-night index, which defines a heat wave as elevated dayand night-time temperatures above the 95th percentile for 3 consecutive days (22.3% increase in mortality, CI: 8.2, 38.2). The proposed definition is deemed appropriate for preparedness measures in a heat early warning system (HEWS) because it is both related to human health outcomes and forecastable. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 16 mortality (Ghumman and Horney, 2016). In terms of geographical coverage, 63% (n = 17) of the selected studies focused on India, eight on Bangladesh and one on Pakistan and Nepal, respectively. It is important to note that no epidemiological studies on the association between ambient temperature and mortality were identified for half of the countries in the region, namely Afghanistan, Bhutan, Maldives, and Sri Lanka. Eight of the studies included in this review (30%) focused solely on rural populations and eleven (40.7%) on urban, while eight studies (30%) evaluated the association between ambient temperature or heat waves and mortality for the general population in a country (including urban and rural areas). All the included studies on ambient temperature and heat waves are summarised in Table 1. In total, the included studies analysed >1.5 million deaths. However, eleven (41%) of the selected articles were based on identical populations, analysed over the same or an overlapping period. The most extensive datasets were provided by the Matlab́s Health and Demographic Surveillance System (HDSS) (around 49 thousand deaths), which is the oldest field site in the region dating back to 1966 and maintained by the International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDRR,B), and India’s Million Death Study (around 412 thousand deaths), which is based on one of the largest Sample Vital Registration Systems (SVRS) in the world. Other data sources included several smaller HDSSs, ICDRR,Bs SVRS in Bangladesh, inpatient hospital records, death records from municipal registrars and heat-related mortality statistics compiled by the IMD. Apart from all-cause mortality, eight studies reported effects of temperature on cause-specific mortality, with the most commonly examined causes being cardiovascular, respiratory, and infectious disease mortality. Outcomes related to perinatal mortality, ischemic heart disease, cancer, malaria, parasitic, vectorborne and water-borne diseases, and external causes were also assessed. Some studies on heat waves analysed specifically heatattributable deaths (Murari et al., 2015; Ghumman and Horney, 2016; Mazdiyasni et al., 2017) Most selected articles (n = 24; 89%) examined the effects of shortterm variations of temperature on mortality, thus measuring heat and/ or cold exposure as daily temperature. However, several studies applied a different timeframe for assessing temperature-mortality effects: Alam et al. (2012) analysed effects based on weekly mean temperature “to minimise fluctuations due to small number” of observations, Babalola et al. (2018) used monthly mean and maximum temperature as a unit of analysis to investigate effects on infant and child mortality, while Murari et al. (2015) and Mazdiyasni et al. (2017) analysed annual (summer) mortality and occurrences of heat waves and heat wave days. The majority of articles considering continuous temperature effects (n = 11; 55%) used mean temperature as it was demonstrated to be a better predictor of the temperature-mortality relationship compared to maximum and minimum temperatures, or because it permitted better comparability with other studies. Several studies (n = 9; 45%) used maximum and minimum daily temperature, in some cases as a sensitivity analysis. Five articles evaluated the combined effect of other meteorological parameters such as humidity, wind speed, and mean radiant temperature with temperature by using an index (Heat Index, Universal Thermal Climate Index, Physiological Equivalent Temperature). Two studies also investigated the impact of temperature variability, i.e., the difference between daily maximum and minimum temperatures, or diurnal range. Excluding studies on heat waves, three of the selected articles limited their analysis to summer months and two to summer and winter months to isolate heat and cold effects. Also, the indices adopted by Nissan et al. (2017) incorporated relative humidity and day-time as well as night-time conditions. About 80% of the studies used data from local stations obtained from a national meteorological department. Two studies relied on climatic records from weather websites provided from the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) under the World Weather Watch Program, one from a weather website, whose exact source we could not trace, and four on data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which are collected from local airports. The period analysed in the time series studies ranged from several months to 49 years (Mazdiyasni et al. 2017). Different approaches were used to determine a threshold for hot and cold effects and to quantify the temperature-mortality association. In general, threshold values were determined based on a specific percentile of the temperature data, through visual inspection of the temperaturemortality plots, or using statistical procedures such as maximum likelihood estimation. Four of the studies on heat waves selected thresholds based on an existing national heat wave definition and four based on a specific percentile of the data. MMTs in the included studies were highly dependent on the temperature and mortality measures, the health outcome of interest, the statistical analysis (non-linear, semi-linear or linear models) and the considered lag structure. Therefore, it is difficult to draw comparisons of the threshold values across studies directly. For articles using mean daily temperature and all-cause daily death counts the temperature threshold values below which mortality started to rise ranged from 19 ◦C to 30 ◦C for lags 0–13 and lag 0–14 (cold effects). The threshold above which deaths started to increase ranged from 20 ◦C to 31 ◦C for lag 0–1 days (heat effects).