(2017) also analysed differences due to other individual or intra-population characteristics such as socioeconomic status, education, occupation, housing, or level of urbanisation. Cold effects have been shown to be most pronounced among infants and children younger than 5 years (Ingole et al., 2012; Babalola et al., 2018) or <15 years (Hashizume, 2009), the elderly (Lindeboom et al., 2012; Ingole et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2018), adults aged 20–69 (Alam et al., 2012; Fu et al., 2018), and those employed in housework (Ingole et al., 2017). Alam et al. (2012) found cold to exert a stronger effect on females, while Ingole et al. (2017, 2012) and Singh et al. (2019) did not find any gender differences. Stronger heat effects were demonstrated for children aged 0–14 (Hajat et al., 2005; Sewe et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2019), adults aged 20–59 (Ingole et al., 2012) and the elderly (Burkart et al., 2014b; Singh et al., 2019). However, no such association was found by Ingole et al. (2015) for the elderly (60 and older) in Vadu HDSS. Burkart et al. (2014) and Ingole et al. (2015) showed that males in Bangladesh, particularly the elderly, and males in Vadu HDSS appear to face increased mortality risk on hot days. However, Ingole et al. (2017) demonstrated the opposite for women in Vadu (results were not statistically significant), and Ingole et al. (2012) did not find any significant association by gender. In terms of socio-economic factors, findings from Burkart et al. (2014) suggest a more pronounced risk of heat-related allcause mortality for people living in urban and in high socio-economic status areas, especially among the elderly, as compared to rural and low socio-economic status areas. The higher heat-related risks for urban areas in Bangladesh were also demonstrated in a previous study by Burkart et al. (2011). Singh et al. (2019) report higher mortality for noninstitutional deaths (those dying outside a hospital) compared to institutional deaths (those dying within a hospital), which the authors broadly attribute to lower socio-economic status. In a study conducted at the individual level in a rural setting in western India, stronger heat effects were observed among farmers, those with low educational attainment as well as those owing more agricultural land (Ingole et al., 2012). Only a few studies on heat wave episodes investigated the role of non-atmospheric factors on the temperature-mortality relationship. Both Azhar et al. (2014) and Singh et al. (2019) report a higher RR of Fig. 4. Pooled estimates of the temperature-all-cause mortality association at (A) lag 0–1 days and (B) lag 0–13 days. Studies included in the meta-analysis: Burkart and Kinney (2017), Fu et al. (2018), Hashizume et al. (2009), Ingole et al. (2017), McMichael et al. (2008). A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 21 mortality from heat waves for females compared to males. Analysis of the deadly heat wave in Karachi, Pakistan during 2015, revealed excess risk of heat-related mortality among the poor and those with lower levels of education, but no effect of fasting during Ramadan was found as initially hypothesised. 3.6. Quality of the evidence Table 3 summarizes the overall quality of the evidence on the association between ambient temperature and heat wave episodes and allcause mortality for the general population in the countries in South Asia. We downgraded the overall quality of the evidence for studies on ambient temperature by the criterion on imprecision as several studies had large confidence intervals and two did not report any confidence intervals. We downgraded the overall quality of the evidence for studies on heat wave episodes for three of the criteria: risk of bias – due to the substantial risk of bias across studies, indirectness – due to ambiguity of outcome definition and imprecision – due to several studies having large confidence intervals and one not reporting any confidence intervals. We upgraded the quality of the evidence on ambient temperature since most studies reported a broadly consistent dose–response pattern, with risk of mortality increasing with increases and decreases of ambient temperatures beyond a certain threshold. The resulting overall quality of the evidence was judged as moderate for studies on ambient temperature and low for studies on heat wave episodes. 3.7. Strength of the evidence Table 3 also summarizes the rating of the strength of the body of evidence. Our judgements were based on the following considerations: ● Quality of the body of evidence: moderate for studies on ambient temperature and low for studies on heat waves (as explained above). ● Direction of effect estimates was largely as expected – risk of mortality increasing with higher and lower ambient temperature beyond a threshold and with more frequent or intense heat wave episodes. ● Confidence in effect estimate: unlikely that a new study on ambient temperature and all-cause mortality would have an effect estimate that would make the results null or statistically insignificant. For heat wave exposure, due to the methodological deficiencies of the studies it cannot be ruled out that new studies might show different effects. ● Other compelling attributes of the data that may influence certainty: for ambient temperature studies, differences in exposure measurement, statistical methods, and contextual factors (completeness in mortality counts, population exposure level, vulnerability and physical and physiological adaptation) make interpretation and comparison difficult. Similarly, the included heat wave episode studies are very heterogenous in terms of heat wave definitions, consideration of lagged effects and mortality displacement, study design and contextual factors (completeness in mortality counts, population exposure level and vulnerability, physical and physiological adaptation), which makes interpretation less certain and clear. For both ambient temperature and heat wave exposure, evidence is based only on a few countries in the regions, with the vast majority of countries not being represented. We compared these considerations to the strength of evidence definitions specified in the Navigation Guide (Table S32) and concluded that for high and low ambient temperatures there was sufficient human evidence that exposure affects all-cause mortality in South Asia and for heat waves – limited evidence. 4. Discussion 4.1. Summary of evidence Our systematic review and meta-analysis resulted in five main findings. First, we found only a limited number of studies (n = 27), which have attempted to quantify the mortality effects of temperature and heat waves in South Asia. Studies were limited geographically, with half of the countries in the region not represented and two countries covered by only one study. Seven populations were analyzed more than once (e.g. four separate analyses based on the Vadu population, three based on the Matlab population, three on the total population of Bangladesh and two on Delhi, Surat, Ahmedabad and five Indian cities). Second, as summarised in Table 4 below, the strength of the evidence on ambient temperature as a risk factor for all-cause mortality was sufficient and on heat wave episodes — limited. The latter rating is not to suggest that heat waves are not a risk a factor for all-cause mortality in South Asia, but rather reflects the lack of a sufficient number of robust studies in a region with very heterogenous contexts and a challenging environment for health data collection. Third, individual studies reported an association of all-cause mortality with both high and low temperatures and heat waves for the population in South Asia. However, our meta-analysis, indicated evidence of an association for high temperatures only, both at shorter and longer lags, possibly due to the very small number (n = 5) and skewed geographical representation of the included studies. In particular, steep supra-linear increase in risk was observed at temperatures above 31◦ C for lag 0–1 days and above 34◦ C for lag 0–13 days, with the risk being higher for longer lags. Fourth, in terms of causespecific mortality, studies found evidence for both heat and cold effects on CVD, IHD and respiratory mortality. Heat effects were also identified for mortality related to infectious diseases and waterand vector-borne diseases, while cold effects were also found for perinatal mortality.