The higher heat-related risks for urban areas in Bangladesh were also demonstrated in a previous study by Burkart et al. (2011). Singh et al. (2019) report higher mortality for noninstitutional deaths (those dying outside a hospital) compared to institutional deaths (those dying within a hospital), which the authors broadly attribute to lower socio-economic status. In a study conducted at the individual level in a rural setting in western India, stronger heat effects were observed among farmers, those with low educational attainment as well as those owing more agricultural land (Ingole et al., 2012). Only a few studies on heat wave episodes investigated the role of non-atmospheric factors on the temperature-mortality relationship. Both Azhar et al. (2014) and Singh et al. (2019) report a higher RR of Fig. 4. Pooled estimates of the temperature-all-cause mortality association at (A) lag 0–1 days and (B) lag 0–13 days. Studies included in the meta-analysis: Burkart and Kinney (2017), Fu et al. (2018), Hashizume et al. (2009), Ingole et al. (2017), McMichael et al. (2008). A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 21 mortality from heat waves for females compared to males. Analysis of the deadly heat wave in Karachi, Pakistan during 2015, revealed excess risk of heat-related mortality among the poor and those with lower levels of education, but no effect of fasting during Ramadan was found as initially hypothesised. 3.6. Quality of the evidence Table 3 summarizes the overall quality of the evidence on the association between ambient temperature and heat wave episodes and allcause mortality for the general population in the countries in South Asia. We downgraded the overall quality of the evidence for studies on ambient temperature by the criterion on imprecision as several studies had large confidence intervals and two did not report any confidence intervals. We downgraded the overall quality of the evidence for studies on heat wave episodes for three of the criteria: risk of bias – due to the substantial risk of bias across studies, indirectness – due to ambiguity of outcome definition and imprecision – due to several studies having large confidence intervals and one not reporting any confidence intervals. We upgraded the quality of the evidence on ambient temperature since most studies reported a broadly consistent dose–response pattern, with risk of mortality increasing with increases and decreases of ambient temperatures beyond a certain threshold. The resulting overall quality of the evidence was judged as moderate for studies on ambient temperature and low for studies on heat wave episodes. 3.7. Strength of the evidence Table 3 also summarizes the rating of the strength of the body of evidence. Our judgements were based on the following considerations: ● Quality of the body of evidence: moderate for studies on ambient temperature and low for studies on heat waves (as explained above). ● Direction of effect estimates was largely as expected – risk of mortality increasing with higher and lower ambient temperature beyond a threshold and with more frequent or intense heat wave episodes. ● Confidence in effect estimate: unlikely that a new study on ambient temperature and all-cause mortality would have an effect estimate that would make the results null or statistically insignificant. For heat wave exposure, due to the methodological deficiencies of the studies it cannot be ruled out that new studies might show different effects. ● Other compelling attributes of the data that may influence certainty: for ambient temperature studies, differences in exposure measurement, statistical methods, and contextual factors (completeness in mortality counts, population exposure level, vulnerability and physical and physiological adaptation) make interpretation and comparison difficult. Similarly, the included heat wave episode studies are very heterogenous in terms of heat wave definitions, consideration of lagged effects and mortality displacement, study design and contextual factors (completeness in mortality counts, population exposure level and vulnerability, physical and physiological adaptation), which makes interpretation less certain and clear. For both ambient temperature and heat wave exposure, evidence is based only on a few countries in the regions, with the vast majority of countries not being represented. We compared these considerations to the strength of evidence definitions specified in the Navigation Guide (Table S32) and concluded that for high and low ambient temperatures there was sufficient human evidence that exposure affects all-cause mortality in South Asia and for heat waves – limited evidence. 4. Discussion 4.1. Summary of evidence Our systematic review and meta-analysis resulted in five main findings. First, we found only a limited number of studies (n = 27), which have attempted to quantify the mortality effects of temperature and heat waves in South Asia. Studies were limited geographically, with half of the countries in the region not represented and two countries covered by only one study. Seven populations were analyzed more than once (e.g. four separate analyses based on the Vadu population, three based on the Matlab population, three on the total population of Bangladesh and two on Delhi, Surat, Ahmedabad and five Indian cities). Second, as summarised in Table 4 below, the strength of the evidence on ambient temperature as a risk factor for all-cause mortality was sufficient and on heat wave episodes — limited. The latter rating is not to suggest that heat waves are not a risk a factor for all-cause mortality in South Asia, but rather reflects the lack of a sufficient number of robust studies in a region with very heterogenous contexts and a challenging environment for health data collection. Third, individual studies reported an association of all-cause mortality with both high and low temperatures and heat waves for the population in South Asia. However, our meta-analysis, indicated evidence of an association for high temperatures only, both at shorter and longer lags, possibly due to the very small number (n = 5) and skewed geographical representation of the included studies. In particular, steep supra-linear increase in risk was observed at temperatures above 31◦ C for lag 0–1 days and above 34◦ C for lag 0–13 days, with the risk being higher for longer lags. Fourth, in terms of causespecific mortality, studies found evidence for both heat and cold effects on CVD, IHD and respiratory mortality. Heat effects were also identified for mortality related to infectious diseases and waterand vector-borne diseases, while cold effects were also found for perinatal mortality. Lastly, the profile of vulnerabilities identified in the reviewed studies is fragmented and sometimes conflicting, possibly due to differences in contexts, heterogeneity in study designs and limitations in data collection. 4.2. Comparison with other systematic reviews Results from the meta-analysis are in contrast to findings from other systematic reviews on LMICs (Burkart et al., 2014a; Amegah, Rezza and Jaakkola, 2016), and evidence from higher income low-latitude countries in Europe and North America (The Eurowinter Group, 1997; Gasparrini et al., 2015), which found mortality effects for both hot and cold temperatures. The presence of cold effects in South Asia is plausible and, similar to populations in moderate climates, might be related to poor physiological and physical adaptation to cold weather, for instance, concerning thermal efficiency of housing and clothing (The Eurowinter Group, 1997; Healy, 2003; Burkart and Kinney, 2017) and relative perceptions of risk and vulnerability (Sperber and Weitzman, 1997). Other mechanisms have also been suggested to explain the somewhat counterintuitive cold effects on mortality in tropical and sub-tropical climates: the higher proportion of moderately cold than extremely cold or hot days (Fu et al., 2018), the importance of relative rather than absolute drop in temperatures (Burkart et al., 2014a; Guo et al., 2016), and insufficient control for seasonal confounding (Kinney et al., 2015). For instance, influenza outbreaks (Burkart et al., 2014a; Yang et al., 2009) and household air pollution due to biomass use for cooking and heating, could affect cold-related mortality due to their potential seasonal variations (Egondi et al., 2012; Ingole et al., 2017), but these have been poorly investigated in the included studies and in LMICs in general, possibly due to lack of routine data. Possible explanations for why we did not observe cold-related increase in mortality risk despite observations from individual studies in this review and evidence from the literature include the small number and limited geographical coverage of studies included in the meta-analysis as well as their large within-study standard errors at the A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 22 lower temperature range. Further studies with large sample sizes and using comparable and advanced methodologies are necessary in order to understand better the direction and magnitude of temperature effects on mortality in the region, particularly for the six countries with limited or no epidemiological studies, namely Pakistan, Nepal, Afghanistan, Bhutan, Maldives, and Sri Lanka. Interestingly, two of the included studies found only cold but no heat effects on mortality (Alam et al., 2012; Hashizume et al., 2009).