Following the experience of Ahmedabad, the government is currently working with over 100 cities and districts within 23 states towards scaling up heat action plans and early warning systems across India (Pradesh et al., 2019). In light of the findings in this review, which demonstrated that temperature thresholds can differ substantially between regions in the same country and that health effects may occur at a temperature below those specified in national heat wave definitions, there is a need for more local epidemiological studies to establish appropriate temperature thresholds, which can inform such early warning systems. Beyond the more immediate and upfront interventions mentioned above, long-term strategies for reducing temperature vulnerabilities are rarely discussed in the included studies. Evidence from other studies shows that improvement of public infrastructure, expansion of public transport, and reduction of the UHI effects through increase in tree canopy, deployment of heat-reflective surfaces on roofs and roads have the potential to decrease heat stress, especially in densely built urban and peri-urban areas (Rizwan, Dennis and Liu, 2008; Garg et al., 2016; Deilami, Kamruzzaman and Liu, 2018). Previous research has suggested that addressing broader development challenges such as economic diversification and shifting of labour away from the agricultural sector (Green et al., 2019), improvement in educational attainment (Lutz, Muttarak and Striessnig, 2014), expansion of essential healthcare, set-up of other social protection programmes and provision of access to electricity (Mastrucci et al., 2019) could be important for decreasing the human cost of climate-related threats. 4.5. Potential interactive effects of temperature and particulate or ozone air pollution Another important avenue for future research is to explore the potential interactions between temperature or heat waves and particulate or ozone air pollution on mortality. Ambient air pollution is a major public health concern in the region: the 2015 iteration of the Global Burden of Disease project estimated that almost 60% of deaths attributable to PM2.5 globally happened in South Asia (Cohen et al., 2017). McMichael et al. (2008) included particulate air pollution in their model for Delhi but found a minimal impact on the temperature effect estimate, while Singh et al. (2019) observed that the associations between mortality and extreme temperature in Varanasi, India are substantially confounded by different air pollutants, in particular PM10. There is emerging evidence that the adverse effects of hot temperature or heat waves on human health can be amplified by high air pollution levels, and vice versa – the harmful effects of air pollution are enhanced by high temperature (Analitis et al., 2018; Burkart et al., 2014b; Kinney, 2018b). Various mechanisms have been identified as a possible explanation of these synergistic effects. Hot days might be associated with higher emissions of certain pollutants since ozone and secondary particles are generated faster in the atmosphere in the presence of sunlight and higher temperatures (Ebi and McGregor, 2008; Kinney, 2018b). Behavioural responses to hot temperatures, e.g., increased use of (airconditioned) cars, can also increase emissions of air pollutants. Physiological stress in the body due to extreme heat may also make individuals more sensitive to air pollution exposure and allergens, or vice versa (Gordon, 2003; Ren et al., 2011). However, not all studies have identified synergistic effects of temperature and air pollution (Basu, Feng and Ostro, 2008; Zanobetti and Schwartz, 2008) and further research is warranted, particularly in South Asia. 4.6. Need for improved environmental and health monitoring We identified the lack of reliable and regularly collected data on mortality and temperature as a major obstacle for conducting analysis in the region. Comprehensive analysis of temperature-related mortality requires daily all-cause or cause-specific mortality data, which are not readily available for most countries in South Asia. Similar to most LMICs, majority of deaths in countries of the region occur at home and remain undocumented or without a medically certified cause of death, hence the reliance on HDSSs and SVRSs for studying premature mortality (Jha et al., 2006). All countries in the region have some form of a vital registration system (UN DESA, 2010), but these have been rated as poorly functioning with the exception of the Maldives and Sri Lanka (Mikkelsen et al., 2015). Continued efforts to strengthen vital registration systems are important not only for mapping vulnerabilities due to temperatures but also to other climate-related health impacts. 4.7. Strengths and limitations This review covered a region highly vulnerable to climate change but relatively understudied. Our review synthesises evidence from studies on ambient temperature, heat waves, and studies with different methodological approaches: a more inclusive approach than previous reviews (Green et al., 2019). We assessed the overall quality and strength of the evidence following the Navigation Guide, specifically developed for environmental health research. Finally, we used a new, flexible statistical approach, which allowed us to pool estimates of non-linear exposure response functions and calculate MMT across studies without having access to individual study data. In contrast, previous meta-analyses based on summary results from the literature relied on more simplified methods that did not account for non-linear and delayed effects. Our study also has some limitations. The considerable heterogeneity of the included studies in terms of study design, lagged effects, outcome and exposure metrics, and the overlap of populations across publications limited the number of studies that could be included in the meta-analysis. Furthermore, although we tried to select studies with comparable designs, differences across studies remained: one study in the metaanalysis reported effects stratified by season as opposed to year-round A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 25 effects (Ingole et al., 2017) and one reported cold effects for lag 0–14 instead of lag 0–13 days (Burkart and Kinney, 2017). A meta-regression could have elucidated differences due to methods, exposure measures, latitude, temperature thresholds, and others, but was not possible given the small number of eligible studies. Half of the studies included in the review and three in the meta-analysis were conducted in India. Therefore, generalizability of our findings might be somewhat limited since the countries in the region differ in terms of their climate, geography and topology, as well as culture, demography, economic development, and other population characteristics. This review has focused on excess mortality associated with temperature variability and extreme temperatures, not accounting for other potential health effects related to nonfatal conditions and psychological stress (Carleton, 2017; Pailler and Tsaneva, 2018). Finally, we may have missed some relevant publications since the review did not cover research published in other languages than English. Also, given the policy relevance of this topic and the scientific practices in the region, it is likely that relevant publications in the grey literature have been excluded (e.g. reports from government or non-profit or international organisations). However, it is highly unlikely that their inclusion would appreciably change the conclusions in this review since high quality quantitative epidemiological studies are mainly published in peer-reviewed journals. 4.8. Conclusions We found a limited number of studies, which have attempted to quantify the mortality effects of temperature in South Asia. The existing body of evidence, focused mainly on India and Bangladesh, points to excess mortality associated with hot and cold temperatures as well as heat waves, but our meta-analysis based on five of the included time series studies confirmed evidence for high temperatures only. More evidence is needed to reduce uncertainty in the shape and size of the temperature-mortality association in a region that is a hotspot for climate vulnerability and experiencing rapid population growth and urbanisation. In particular, a better understanding of the modifying factors of the temperature-mortality relationship is necessary to inform targeted interventions in the region. In light of slow progress in achieving greenhouse gas emission reduction targets, more evidence on viable adaptation options for the population in South Asia is particularly important. More robust exposure–response functions are also essential for health impact assessments of temperature-related mortality and morbidity burdens under different climate change mitigation or adaptation scenarios to inform decision making. Funding VI gratefully acknowledges funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 730,004 (project PUCS). JB gratefully acknowledges funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreements No 865,564 (European Research Council Consolidator Grant EARLY-ADAPT), 727,852 (project BlueAction) and 730,004 (project PUCS). CT was funded through a Ram´on y Cajal fellowship (RYC-2015–17402) awarded by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. Appendix A. Supplementary material Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106170.