Research in this direction can benefit from different study designs (e.g. case studies, mixed methods, personal temperature measures, etc.) as well as insights from other disciplines than public health such as exposure science, sociology, behaviour studies, economics, architecture, urban design, etc. (Maller and Strengers, 2011; Mil`a et al., 2020). 4.4. Adaptation and policy implications The role of adaptation for minimising health impacts of nonoptimum temperatures is poorly investigated in the reviewed articles. Nevertheless, the included studies propose a range of interventions based on their findings. Most of these are related to increasing public awareness of the problem through public messaging or health education campaigns; encouraging preventative measures (e.g. wearing light, bright-coloured and sun-protective clothing, avoiding physical activity Table 4 Summary of findings. Summary of finding Studies contributing to the findings Certainty in the evidence (Navigation Guide) Brief rationale of the rating around the certainty of the evidence Ambient temperature: Positive association of all-cause mortality with temperatures below and above a MMT threshold. Alam et al. (2012); Hashizume et al. (2009); Sewe et al. (2018); McMichael (2008);Burkart et al. (2014b) ; Burkart et al. (2011); Ingole et al. (2017, 2012, 2015); Hajat et al. (2005); Fu et al. (2018); Lindeboom et al. (2012); Desai et al. (2015); Burkart and Kinney (2017); Babalola et al. (2018); Rathi et al. (2017); Shrestha et al. (2017); Dutta et al. (2020); Nori-Sarma et al. (2019a); Singh et al. (2019) Sufficient Findings based on studies of large sample size and mostly of good quality. Overall, direction of effect was consistent across studies, but there was a lack of estimate comparability due to methodological differences. Evidence of an exposure–response pattern was found. Studies were very skewed geographically. Heat wave episodes: Heat waves are associated with increases n all-cause mortality Azhar (2014); Ghumman and Horney (2016); Mazdiyasni et al. (2017); Murari et al. (2014);Nissan et al. (2017); Hess et al. (2018); Nori-Sarma et al. (2019a); Singh et al. (2019); Nori-Sarma et al. (2019b) Limited Findings are consistent, but based on a small number of studies, many of which score high on risk of bias and have methodological weaknesses, thus chance cannot be ruled out. Studies were very skewed geographically and effect estimates were not comparable due to differences in study design and methods. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 24 or outdoor work during the hottest hours, staying hydrated), especially among the elderly, outdoor workers and those with existing cardiovascular, respiratory and other chronic diseases; enhancing response capacity and coordination of public health centers; distribution of electric fans; setting-up of cooling centers — air conditioned sites designated as shelters during extreme heat (Widerynski et al., 2016), and introducing early warning systems. We note that some of the proposed technological cooling interventions are to be viewed with caution due to their limited scope and undesirable consequences. Although studies have shown the protective effect of the use of air conditioning units during heat waves (Barreca et al., 2016) and air conditioning is growing rapidly in South Asia, this solution still remains out of reach for the majority of the population due to its high operational costs (Mastrucci et al., 2019). Increased use of air conditioning units in urban areas is also shown to contribute to increase in outdoor temperatures by one degree or more (Lundgren and Kjellstrom, 2013), it leads to increased risk of power outages as a result of higher pressure on energy grids and, most importantly, it further contributes to climate change through upsurge in electricity consumption (Gupta et al., 2012). Use of electric fans has often been proposed as a more affordable alternative to air conditioning in low resource settings. However, a 2012 Cochrane systematic review showed that the benefits of using electric fans during heat waves are uncertain and may actually increase mortality risk, especially if ambient temperature is above body temperature (35◦ C), by contributing to an increased rate of dehydration and increased convective heat gain (Gupta et al., 2012). A few formal evaluations of heat-health warning systems have been conducted so far, and they appear to show a notable reduction in excess mortality following a heat wave (Ebi et al., 2004; Martínez-Solanas and Basaga˜na, 2019). The first Heat Action Plan, including an early heat warning system, in South Asia was implemented in the city of Ahmedabad, in India’s western province of Gujarat, following the deadly heat wave of May 2010. According to a pilot formal evaluation of the plan, it has been effective in averting 1190 (95%CI 162–2218) average annualized deaths two years after its implementation (Hess et al., 2018). Following the experience of Ahmedabad, the government is currently working with over 100 cities and districts within 23 states towards scaling up heat action plans and early warning systems across India (Pradesh et al., 2019). In light of the findings in this review, which demonstrated that temperature thresholds can differ substantially between regions in the same country and that health effects may occur at a temperature below those specified in national heat wave definitions, there is a need for more local epidemiological studies to establish appropriate temperature thresholds, which can inform such early warning systems. Beyond the more immediate and upfront interventions mentioned above, long-term strategies for reducing temperature vulnerabilities are rarely discussed in the included studies. Evidence from other studies shows that improvement of public infrastructure, expansion of public transport, and reduction of the UHI effects through increase in tree canopy, deployment of heat-reflective surfaces on roofs and roads have the potential to decrease heat stress, especially in densely built urban and peri-urban areas (Rizwan, Dennis and Liu, 2008; Garg et al., 2016; Deilami, Kamruzzaman and Liu, 2018). Previous research has suggested that addressing broader development challenges such as economic diversification and shifting of labour away from the agricultural sector (Green et al., 2019), improvement in educational attainment (Lutz, Muttarak and Striessnig, 2014), expansion of essential healthcare, set-up of other social protection programmes and provision of access to electricity (Mastrucci et al., 2019) could be important for decreasing the human cost of climate-related threats. 4.5. Potential interactive effects of temperature and particulate or ozone air pollution Another important avenue for future research is to explore the potential interactions between temperature or heat waves and particulate or ozone air pollution on mortality. Ambient air pollution is a major public health concern in the region: the 2015 iteration of the Global Burden of Disease project estimated that almost 60% of deaths attributable to PM2.5 globally happened in South Asia (Cohen et al., 2017). McMichael et al. (2008) included particulate air pollution in their model for Delhi but found a minimal impact on the temperature effect estimate, while Singh et al. (2019) observed that the associations between mortality and extreme temperature in Varanasi, India are substantially confounded by different air pollutants, in particular PM10. There is emerging evidence that the adverse effects of hot temperature or heat waves on human health can be amplified by high air pollution levels, and vice versa – the harmful effects of air pollution are enhanced by high temperature (Analitis et al., 2018; Burkart et al., 2014b; Kinney, 2018b). Various mechanisms have been identified as a possible explanation of these synergistic effects. Hot days might be associated with higher emissions of certain pollutants since ozone and secondary particles are generated faster in the atmosphere in the presence of sunlight and higher temperatures (Ebi and McGregor, 2008; Kinney, 2018b).