We evaluated each study against the following six domains of Risk of Bias (RoB): selection, confounding, exposure assessment, outcome assessment, selective reporting and other bias (appropriateness of statistical methods). For each of these possible sources of bias we rated the RoB as definitely low, probably low, probably high and definitely high. The rating scale is based on a conservative approach, where insufficient information to judge the risk of bias for specific domain results in a rating of probably high risk of bias. The two reviewers (AD, VI) independently performed the risk of bias assessment and discussed results with the other coauthors in case consensus could not be reached. Following the Navigation Guide Methodology, we considered an individual study to have a definitely low or probably low RoB if all domains of assessment were rated as definitely low or probably low. Due to the very limited number of studies the results of the RoB assessment were not used to exclude studies from the quantitative synthesis. 2.4.2. Assessment of the quality of the evidence across studies We rated the overall quality of the evidence for studies on ambient temperature and heat wave episodes separately. Rating categories included high, moderate, or low. Following the approach in the Navigation Guide, we initially rated the body of evidence as moderate and then “downgraded” or “upgraded” this rating based on eight factors. The downgrading factors included risk of bias across studies, indirectness, inconsistency, imprecision, publication bias, and the upgrading factors consisted of size of the effect, dose response pattern and possibility of confounding minimizing effects. We assessed the RoB across studies based on the RoB rating of individual studies, as outlined above. As recommended in the Navigation Guide, the RoB across studies was judged on the basis of each study, but with more weight placed on high quality studies. 2.4.3. Assessment of the strength of the evidence across studies We also rated the strength of the body of evidence, separately for ambient temperature and heat wave episodes, based on the following four considerations outlined in the Navigation Guide: i) quality of the body of evidence (i.e., rating from previous assessment stage), ii) direction of effect, iii) confidence in the effect (likelihood that a new study would change our conclusions) and iv) any other attributes of the data that might affect certainty. 2.5. Meta-analysis From the studies included in the review, we selected those that were sufficiently compatible in terms of study design, outcome and exposure measures, and lag structure, in order to conduct a meta-analysis of the association between temperature and mortality. After screening all studies, we identified that the most common choice of study design, outcome and exposure variables, and lag structure was the following: time series studies using daily all-cause mortality and daily mean temperature and reporting effects for lag 0–1 and lag 0–13 days. Hence, we limited our choice to studies with these characteristics (Burkart et al., 2011; Fu et al., 2018; Hashizume et al., 2009; Ingole et al., 2017; McMichael et al., 2008). For studies that included a plot of the temperature-mortality association, we extracted numerical representation of the exposure–response curves and their confidence intervals at every 0.5 increment of the temperature values using the web-based tool WebPlotDigitizer (Rohatgi, 2014). Authors of two studies that did not include such visualizations were contacted to acquire the necessary data. We also extracted the following data: i) average number of daily deaths, ii) number of days analysed in the study and iii) range of the distribution of exposure variables. The analysis was performed separately for the exposure response curves at lag 0–1 days and lag 0–13 days. Since the reference value used across studies differed (in most cases this was the MMT), recalculation of the curves and standard errors using a common reference value was necessary before combining the curves. We set the reference values for re-centering the curves to be equal to the average MMT across the included studies. This corresponded to 24.5 ◦C for the exposure response curves at lag 0–1 days and 26.5◦C at lag 0–13 days. Even though the selected studies include locations within different climatic zones, they have comparable temperature distributions and all of them included the reference temperature values for the meta-analysis. Although the estimates across a single exposure–response curve are correlated because they share the same reference category, without available data on these correlations, it is not possible to compute the standard errors that would result from recentering the curve to another reference value. To overcome this challenge and calculate the standard errors after re-centering the curves without access to the individual-level data, we applied the recently developed methodology by Basaga˜na (2019). Using the extracted data described above, the method allows to simulate individual datasets in order to change the reference category and approximate the confidence intervals (Basaga˜na, 2019). In brief, the approach consists in the generation of a dataset, which has an identical number of observations as the original one and upon analysis produces a good approximation of the exposure–response function and confidence interval reported by the study. A more detailed description of the methodology, including a reproducible example with R software code, is available in the publication Basaga˜na (2019). After calculating the standard errors and the exposure–response estimates at each temperature increment, we combined the non-linear exposure–response curves of the individual studies using a meta-smoothing approach (Schwartz and Zanobetti, 2000). The latter method consisted of conducting a random-effects point-wise metaanalysis for each exposure level (Schwartz and Zanobetti, 2000). The analysis was performed using the R (version 3.6.1) package ’metafor’ (Viechtbauer, 2010). The datasets and the R software code for conducting the analysis are available in the Supplementary Material of this publication. 3. Results 3.1. Literature search We identified a total of 10, 713 references from the electronic databases’ search and through other sources, after removal of duplicate entries. After screening these for relevance based on title and abstract, we selected 50 articles for in-depth review. A detailed evaluation of the content against the inclusion criteria resulted in 27 studies being included in the final analysis. The flow diagram in Fig. 2 illustrates in detail the literature search and the selection process. 3.2. Characteristics of included studies Among the included studies, about half (n = 15; 56%) examined the effects of both heat and cold on mortality, five (19%) focused only on heat effects and one on cold effects, while nine studies (33%) assessed the association of heat waves with mortality and one addressed the A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 5 association between cold spells and mortality (See Table 1 for a more detailed description). The studies used diverse approaches for defining hot and cold temperature effects — based on the MMT, a specific percentile of the temperature distribution, an arbitrary temperature threshold, the season (summer/winter months), deviation of temperatures from their annual average, or simply based on the pattern of the temperature-mortality relationship. The definition of heat waves was not uniform across studies. Five used the conventional approach of considering both the duration and intensity of a heat wave (Mazdiyasni et al., 2017; Nissan et al., 2017; Nori-Sarma et al., 2019a; Singh et al., 2019; Nori-Sarma et al., 2019b), while the rest considered only its intensity. Four studies used the heat wave definition by the India Meteorological Department (IMD) based only on maximum temperature thresholds (Azhar et al., 2014; Murari et al., 2015; Nori-Sarma et al., 2019a; Nori-Sarma et al., 2019b) and one study did not provide a specific definition, but analysed maximum temperatures and heat-induced Records identiﬁed through database searching (n = 10, 713 ) Pubmed: n = 3, 606 Web of Science: n = 3, 173 Scopus: n = 2, 824 Embase: n= 1, 110 ScreeningIncluded Eligibility Identiﬁcation Additional records identiﬁed through lateral reference search in the included studies (n = 2) Records after duplicates removed (n = 6,759) Records screened (n = 6, 759) Records excluded (n = 6, 709) Full-text articles assessed for eligibility (n = 50) Full-text articles excluded, with reasons (Table S4) (n = 23) Studies included in the qualitative synthesis (n = 27) Studies included in the quantitative synthesis (meta-analysis) (n = 5, Hashizume et al., 2009; Burkart et al., 2011; McMichael et al., 2008; Ingole et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2018) Fig. 2. Flow diagram of literature search and study selection process. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 6 Table 1 Characteristics of reviewed studies and main findings. Reference Methods Exposure Outcome Main findings Study population and location Category of effect Study period Study design and statistical method Lag structure Control variables (confounders and effect modifiers) Measure and source Measure and source Rural areas Alam et al. (2012) General population Abhoynagar, Bangladesh Heat and cold effects (continuous temperature) 1983–2009 Time series analysis, Poisson generalized additive model (GAM) Lag 0–1 week, lag 0–2 week, lag 0–3 week Time trend, seasonal pattern Average weekly mean temperature Bangladesh Meteorological Department All-cause mortality (n = 4,850) ICDRR, B́s Sample Vital Registration System (SVRS) in Abhoynagar subdistrict Weekly mean temperatures (lag 0) below the 25th percentile and between the 25th (23 ◦C) and 75th percentiles (29.6 ◦C) were associated with increased mortality risk, particularly in females and adults aged 20–59 years by 2.3–2.4% (CI: 4.4, 0.1) for every 1 ◦C decrease. Temperature above the 75th percentile (29.6 ◦C) did not increase the risk. Hashizume et al. (2009) General population Matlab, Bangladesh Heat and cold effects (continuous temperature) 1994–2002 Time series analysis, Poisson generalized linear model Lag 0–1 days, lag 0–13 days (cumulative) Year, season, day of the week, public holiday Daily mean temperature Bangladesh Meteorological Department All-cause mortality excluding external causes (n = 13, 270) and causespecific mortality (cardiovascular, respiratory, perinatal, infectious and parasitic mortality and others) ICDRR, B́s Health and Demographic Surveillance System (HDSS) in Matlab Every 1 ◦C decrease in mean temperature (lag 0–13) was associated with a 3.2% (95% CI 0.9, 5.5) increase in allcause mortality.