Summary of the quality assessment Overall quality of evidence starts: Moderate Moderate Moderate + (1) +(-1) = Moderate. Downgrading/upgrading resulted in moderate rating for the quality of evidence. Low Moderate + (-1) + (-1) + (-1) = Low. Downgrading changed the quality from moderate to low. Summary of findings n/a Overall moderate quality of the evidence of higher risk of allcause mortality for high and low ambient temperature exposure. n/a Overall low quality of the evidence of higher risk of all-cause mortality during heat wave episodes. Strength of evidence assessment Quality of evidence Moderate Low Direction of effect estimates n/a Direction largely as expected: higher risk of mortality at high and low ambient temperatures. n/a Direction largely as expected: higher risk of mortality during heat wave episodes. Confidence in effect estimate n/a Studies on ambient temperature measure directly the outcome of interest, direction of effect is largely consistent, majority score low on risk of bias, in particular one study with a large sample size, but several studies have large confidence intervals or do not report confidence intervals at all. It is unlikely that a new study on ambient temperature and all-cause mortality would have an effect estimate that would make the results null or statistically insignificant. n/a Most studies have high RoB, do not measure directly the outcome of interest and not all potential confounders are controlled for. Due to these methodological deficiencies it cannot be ruled out that new studies might show different effect estimates. Other aspects n/a Differences in exposure measurement, statistical methods, and contextual factors, including completeness in mortality counts, population exposure level and vulnerability, differences in physical and physiological adaptation across study populations make interpretation and comparison difficult. n/a Differences in heat wave definitions, consideration of lagged effects and mortality displacement, study design, contextual factors, including completeness in mortality counts, population exposure level and vulnerability, physical and physiological adaptation across study populations make interpretation and comparison difficult. Overall strength of evidence Sufficient We found sufficient evidence that ambient low and high temperatures are positively associated with all-cause mortality for the population in South Asia, where chance, bias, and confounding can be ruled out with reasonable confidence. The available evidence includes results from one or more welldesigned, well conducted studies, and the conclusion is unlikely to be strongly affected by the results of future studies. Due to lack of comparability across studies quantitative estimates can only be interpreted in broad terms. Limited We found limited evidence that heat wave exposure is associated with all-cause mortality for the population in South Asia. A positive association is observed between exposure and outcome; however, chance, bias, and confounding cannot be ruled out with reasonable confidence. Confidence in the association is constrained by the limited number and size of studies and the low quality of individual studies. Further studies, particularly with more rigorous control for confounding, high quality outcome data and consideration of temporal aspects of the association may allow an assessment of effects. A. Dimitrova et al. Environment International 146 (2021) 106170 23 changes in the human body such as increased plasma viscosity, blood pressure, and elevated cholesterol levels (Basu, 2009; Moghadamnia et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2014). Cold has been associated with an increased risk of respiratory infections through bronchoconstriction and changes in immunological reactions (Gasparrini et al., 2015), while physiological stress of heat on the respiratory systems is less well understood (Seltenrich, 2015). Several causes of death, which have been associated with temperature in other epidemiological studies, namely deaths from cerebrovascular diseases (Stafoggia et al., 2006), diabetes (Seposo, Dang and Honda, 2017), pre-existing psychiatric disorders (Stafoggia et al., 2006) and adverse birth outcomes (Son et al., 2019), were not investigated in any of the included studies. 4.3. Vulnerabilities and modifying factors The studies included in this review identified infants, children, the elderly, adults and people occupied in housework as more vulnerable to the impacts of low temperatures and children, adults, farmers, people with low educational attainment, and those owning agricultural land or living in urban areas as more susceptible to the impacts of high temperatures. Overall, women and people with lower socio-economic status were reported as more susceptible to the impacts of heat waves. However, evidence on certain vulnerabilities is often based on single studies and findings for some sub-groups (especially gender and age groups) are inconsistent, which warrants further investigation. Furthermore, some of the underlying factors shaping vulnerabilities are poorly understood and many questions are still to be elucidated — for instance, are people in urban areas more affected by heat because of higher exposure (e.g., UHI effect) or because of differences in age and disease patterns (Burkart et al., 2014b)? Are adults at higher risk because they are more involved in outdoor occupational activities? Are gender differences in vulnerability due to physiological predispositions, occupational differences or differences in treatment seeking behaviour? Are less educated people at higher risk because of occupation, their health status, access to resources (water, housing, information, health care, etc.), or heat-health awareness? How does personal perception of risk shape vulnerabilities? Answering these questions would require better understanding of contextual factors that moderate vulnerabilities. Besides population characteristics, the built environment, in particular, building features, urban form, and density of green spaces, has also been shown to be an important determinant of temperature-related health risks (Scovronick & Armstrong, 2012; Dang et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2018; Horrison & Amirtham, 2016), but its modifying effect in the included studies and in LMICs in general has not been well investigated (Pramanik and Punia, 2019). One of the studies in this review (Alam, et al. 2012) hypothesised that differences in thermal efficiency of housing might be a possible explanation of the more marked effects of low temperatures on mortality in Matlab as opposed to Abhoyangar. However, Ingole et al. (2017) did not find mortality outcomes in the summer months in Vadu HDSS to be related to housing characteristics. In terms of vulnerabilities, another important knowledge gap to be addressed are the temperature effects for the population living in substandard housing conditions in the region. 30.4% of the urban population in South Asia lives in informal settlements, with this share being particularly high in some countries such as Afghanistan (62.7%), Bangladesh (55.1%), Nepal (54.3%) and Pakistan (45.5%) (World Bank, 2014). Populations living in informal housing might be particularly vulnerable to non-optimum temperatures due to overcrowding, the poor quality and limited insulation of the housing, but also as a result of other interrelated factors such as poverty, lack of access to health care, sanitation and information on heat wave risks, limited access to clean drinking water and electricity, and restricted household ventilation. Two studies investigating how heat varies within the cities of Nairobi, Kenya and Ahmadabad, India, respectively, demonstrated higher local temperature exposure in informal settlements compared to other city areas, with average difference between 5 to almost 10 ◦F in the case of Nairobi (Scott et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019). We found only one study globally, which has investigated the temperature effects on mortality in informal settlements, but this was based in Nairobi (Egondi et al. 2012). Clearly, the lack of routinely collected health data for populations in informal settlements hinders scientific studies. To overcome this, Scovronick et al. (2015) provide an overview of available data sources and epidemiological designs with modest data requirements, which could potentially be deployed for investigating the association between weather and health in these understudied populations. Comprehensive analysis of vulnerabilities and their determinants could help identify more targeted and cost-effective adaptation strategies, which is particularly important for low income settings. Research in this direction can benefit from different study designs (e.g. case studies, mixed methods, personal temperature measures, etc.) as well as insights from other disciplines than public health such as exposure science, sociology, behaviour studies, economics, architecture, urban design, etc. (Maller and Strengers, 2011; Mil`a et al., 2020). 4.4. Adaptation and policy implications The role of adaptation for minimising health impacts of nonoptimum temperatures is poorly investigated in the reviewed articles. Nevertheless, the included studies propose a range of interventions based on their findings. Most of these are related to increasing public awareness of the problem through public messaging or health education campaigns; encouraging preventative measures (e.g. wearing light, bright-coloured and sun-protective clothing, avoiding physical activity Table 4 Summary of findings. Summary of finding Studies contributing to the findings Certainty in the evidence (Navigation Guide) Brief rationale of the rating around the certainty of the evidence Ambient temperature: Positive association of all-cause mortality with temperatures below and above a MMT threshold. Alam et al. (2012); Hashizume et al. (2009); Sewe et al. (2018); McMichael (2008);Burkart et al. (2014b) ; Burkart et al. (2011); Ingole et al. (2017, 2012, 2015); Hajat et al. (2005); Fu et al. (2018); Lindeboom et al. (2012); Desai et al. (2015); Burkart and Kinney (2017); Babalola et al. (2018); Rathi et al. (2017); Shrestha et al. (2017); Dutta et al. (2020); Nori-Sarma et al. (2019a); Singh et al. (2019) Sufficient Findings based on studies of large sample size and mostly of good quality. Overall, direction of effect was consistent across studies, but there was a lack of estimate comparability due to methodological differences. Evidence of an exposure–response pattern was found. Studies were very skewed geographically. Heat wave episodes: Heat waves are associated with increases n all-cause mortality Azhar (2014); Ghumman and Horney (2016); Mazdiyasni et al. (2017); Murari et al. (2014);Nissan et al. (2017); Hess et al. (2018); Nori-Sarma et al. (2019a); Singh et al. (2019); Nori-Sarma et al. (2019b) Limited Findings are consistent, but based on a small number of studies, many of which score high on risk of bias and have methodological weaknesses, thus chance cannot be ruled out. Studies were very skewed geographically and effect estimates were not comparable due to differences in study design and methods. A. Dimitrova et al.