Most rural areas, especially in underdeveloped Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1597; doi:10.3390/ijerph15081597 www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1597 2 of 15 countries, lack meteorological data due to a paucity of weather monitoring stations[15,16]. Additionally, relatively small rural populations militate against epidemiologic studies with sufficient statistical power. Moreover, the deﬁnition of rural areas remains vague and existing deﬁnitions depend on that of urban areas [17]. There is no single, universally preferred deﬁnition of rural, nor is there a single rural deﬁnition that can serve all policy purposes [ 18]. Thus, a rural area deﬁned in a developed nation may differ from another in a less developed country in terms of metrics of population density, infrastructure, and resources. Even though fewer studies have examined the temperature-mortality relationship in rural areas, some studies in this category have reported that people in less urban areas may be more susceptible to heat [16,19–21]. There is also emerging evidence regarding high rates of heat-related illness in rural areas [22]. Overall, vulnerability to climate change is a function of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity [23], making isolated rural populations with inadequate infrastructure more vulnerable to heat-related mortality. However, no study to date has systematically assessed the current global epidemiologic evidence related to rural vulnerability to summer heat in the peer-reviewed heat-related mortality literature. The goal of this study is thus to conduct a systematic review of the epidemiologic literature of the association between high temperature and mortality in rural populations and generate the synthesis of results from different studies across the globe, using meta-analysis to examine rural vulnerability to heat-related mortality worldwide. 2. Materials and Methods 2.1. Search Strategy and Screening Criteria We conducted a systematic literature review in April 2016 and revisited the literature in May 2017, and again in April 2018 to update our search. We used scientiﬁc peer-reviewed search engines PubMed, Web of Science, and Google Scholar with no restriction on the geographical location or period of publication. Keywords used for this review were: (Rural OR “non-urban”) AND (high temperature OR heat OR hot weather OR climate) AND (mortality OR deaths) AND (relative risk OR risk ratio OR effect measure OR change OR “RR”). There were no restrictions on publication date or location of studies. We manually screened the abstracts of all studies initially located through the search and excluded the following: 1. Studies not published in English; 2. Studies not performed on human populations (non-epidemiological studies); 3. Studies reporting no effect estimates (i.e., relative risks (RRs) or % change in mortality), those reporting effect estimates only for subpopulations, such as the elderly , but not for the entire population in the study area; 4. Commentaries, review articles, and editorials; 5. Studies on morbidity; and 6. Studies focusing on extreme temperature (heat waves), due to their inconsistent deﬁnitions [24,25] and occurrence within short time periods [26]. 2.2. Data Extraction The effect estimate (RR or % change in mortality) reported in each study was extracted. When effect estimates for multiple lag periods were reported in a study, we selected the estimate for the shortest lag period, usually 0–1 day, due to the acute nature of high temperature effects [26]. Studies have reported that longer lag periods are likely to result in overestimation of the effects, especially when distributed lag non-linear models (DLNMs) are used [27,28]. Due to differences in temperature metrics, studies that used mean daily temperatures were separated from those that used daily maximum Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1597 3 of 15 temperatures. We normalized and converted all effect estimates and their 95% conﬁdence intervals (CIs) into relative risks per Celsius degree (RRs per◦C) increase in temperature for uniﬁcation purposes, to be able to combine them into an overall RR estimate. The random effects model, which assumes that different studies were drawn from different populations with unique conditions that could impact on the treatment (i.e., temperature) effect, was preferred to the ﬁxed effects model since each study was conducted in a different rural setting and under different conditions. Moreover, the random-effects model ensures that the different effect sizes in all studies are represented in the summary estimate [29]. We further stratiﬁed the selected studies into groups based on their level of development, per the United Nations’ classiﬁcation system [30]. According to the Development Policy and Analysis Division (DPAD) of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs in the United Nations Secretariat, all countries can be classiﬁed into one of these broad categories based on the prevailing economic conditions: Developed economies, economies in transition, and developing economies. We then performed a sensitivity analysis to examine whether the level of development was a factor that affects the association between high temperature and mortality. Both the Cochran’s Q and the I 2 statistics can be used to determine statistical heterogeneity in the results. The Cochran’s Q, calculated as the weighted sum of squared differences between individual study effects and the pooled or summarized effect across studies, is the traditional measure of heterogeneity, while the I 2 statistic explains percentage of variation across studies that is due to heterogeneity rather than chance [ 31,32]. The relationship can be summarized by the equation: I2 = 100% × (Q − df)/Q; where df is the degrees of freedom, deﬁned as the number of studies used minus 1. For this study, we relied on the I 2 statistic, since it is more interpretable, provides more accurate estimates, and is more independent of the number of studies used in the analysis than the Cochran’s Q [32]. All statistical analysis was performed using Comprehensive Meta-Analysis software (Version 3.0, Biostat, Englewood, NJ, USA). 3. Results The literature search generated 479 studies. Figure 1 presents the selection and exclusion of studies. Among the 459 studies retained based on the ﬁrst two exclusion criteria, 252 studies were excluded because they studied morbidity instead of mortality. Among the 207 remaining studies, 45 were excluded because they relied on climate variables other than temperature, and 36 were excluded because they focused on interventions and evaluations. The remaining 126 studies were also scrutinized: 46 on other causes of mortality not related to heat, 27 with no effect estimates, 18 on heat waves, and eight duplicated studies were all excluded. Further, seven systematic reviews, commentaries, and editorials and six studies conducted in non-rural settings were also excluded. As a result, 14 studies that examined the effects of high ambient temperature on mortality were identiﬁed. Table 1 presents the characteristics of these 14 studies. All studies were published in the last eleven years between 2006 and 2017. Two studies were conducted in North America (United States), two in Europe (England and Wales, Czech Republic), eight in Asia (China, Bangladesh, India), and two in Africa (Ghana, Burkina Faso). Among the 14 studies identiﬁed, eleven used daily mean for temperature metric, two used daily maximum and one used weekly mean (Table 1). In conducting the meta-analysis, we only included the eleven studies that used daily mean temperature since the other two temperature metric groups contain insufﬁcient numbers of studies. The geographical locations of these eleven studies are shown in Figure 2. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1597 4 of 15 Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 15 Figure 1. Flow chart illustrating study selection. Figure 1. Flow chart illustrating study selection. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1597 5 of 15 Table 1. Characteristics of selected studies that examined temperature effects on all-cause and cause-speciﬁc mortality.