Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1597 10 of 15 In controlling for potential confounding factors, most of the selected studies adjusted for seasonality and time trends. Only a few adjusted for other environmental hazards, such as air pollutants, consistent with the observation of Madrigano [42] that not all studies adjust for ozone as a confounding factor when assessing temperature-mortality relationships. Exposure to ambient air pollutants, mainly particulate matter (PM) and ozone, have been linked to premature mortality [ 48], and thus may confound the temperature-mortality association [26,49]. Ozone is a summer pollutant and climate change is projected to detrimentally affect ozone air quality and consequently increase mortality [50]. The observed correlations of PM concentrations with temperature are weaker than for ozone [51], yet PM has been found to peak in the summer in certain regions, such as the East Coast of the U.S. [26]. Therefore, PM also may be a confounder for the association between temperature and mortality in these regions. Noting that air pollutants and temperature have different biological effects, Guo [47] posited that their effects are likely to be independent of each other. In summary , the results for confounding or effect modification by air pollutants on the temperature-mortality relationship remain mixed [26]. Our results indicate evidence of heat vulnerability in rural areas. We estimated a 3% excess in all-cause mortality and an 11% excess in cardiovascular mortality to be associated with a 1 ◦C increase in mean ambient temperature. In comparing the excess heat-related mortality risk with studies in the world’s urban centers, we used the relative risks from a review [24] and illustrated the RRs in Figure A1 in the Appendix A. As shown in Figure A1, all-cause mortality RRs per 1 ◦C increase in large urban areas ranged from 1.00 to 1.17, with more than half of the estimates falling into the range of 1.01–1.03. Therefore, the excess risks in rural areas are similar to those in urban areas. Our results suggest that rural residents may not be less vulnerable to heat. Rural populations may beneﬁt from the absence of extreme heat or “heat island” in rural environments, attributable to larger numbers of water bodies, trees, greenery ﬁelds, and lower population density [36]. On the other hand, heat vulnerability is not only a product of heat exposure factors but, more importantly, sensitivity and adaptive capacity [52]. Among rural inhabitants, marked differences exist in the components of heat vulnerability, such as lack of health care infrastructure and access to air conditioning, social isolation, informal settlements, and worse baseline health status. Moreover, certain occupational groups residing in rural areas,such as agricultural workers who spend a great deal of time exposed to extreme temperatures, may be a factor that contributes to increased susceptibility of rural populations to heat. Lindeboom et al. [36] noted the possibility of gradual acclimatization as communities adapt to living in warmer climates. Generally , regions within the tropical zone are better acclimatized and less sensitive to heat compared to those in the mid-latitude or temperate zones. This is apparent in higher temperature thresholds observed in tropical climates such as the Northern part of Ghana with a threshold above 30 ◦C [37]. Other tropical places in Nouna, Burkina Faso [35], and Bangladesh[15,34,36]had similarly high temperature thresholds (see Table 1). Temperature thresholds for locations in the mid-latitudes were lower. In the southern part of the US, classified as the warmest region in the country [53], temperatures above 28 ◦C increased mortality [16]. The thresholds were much lower for Hubei [40], Jiangsu [20], and Tibet [39] provinces of China. Even though rural residents in tropical countries seem better acclimatized to warm climates [35], their low adaptive capacity due to limited resources to cope with heat[15,36,37,39]increases their vulnerability . For instance, most houses in rural Matlab Bangladesh were described as “roofed and walled with corrugated iron sheets” [36], making residents more prone to heat effects. Informal settlements [37], common in rural areas of developing countries, can lead to overcrowding, thus impeding adequate ventilation and increasing pressure on limited rural health resources. Some studies computed the heat vulnerability index by controlling for effect modiﬁers, such as average years of education, percentage of people ≥65 years old, number of air conditioning units per household, number of beds in health institutions per 1000 people [20], rurality, and deprivation [33]. Chen et al. [20] found a signiﬁcant negative correlation between urbanicity and the heat vulnerability index in Jiangsu Province, China, while a study conducted in England and Wales found no correlation [33]. Previous studies have also found higher heat-related mortality risks in individuals Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1597 11 of 15 with lower or no education [20,39,40], lower prevalence of air conditioning [1,20], as well as inadequate hospital infrastructure [20,40]. A majority of these individuals reside in rural areas. There were inconsistencies in the deﬁnitions of rural areas across studies. Some studies just mentioned “rural” with no deﬁnition. Within the United States, for example, the Census Bureau’s deﬁnition of “rural” varies state-to-state. Further, the character of “rural” regions may depend greatly upon a country’s level of economic development, per the United Nations’ classiﬁcation system [30]. To explore this point, a separate sensitivity analysis was conducted for developed and developing countries, as shown in Figures 5 and 6. Heat-related mortality risk was higher in developing countries as compared to developed countries (i.e., 3.6% and 2.0%, respectively), consistent with the lack of infrastructure in developing countries. We acknowledge additional limitations of this study. Our comprehensive search of international epidemiological studies on the association between temperature and mortality only located 14 studies, with the same temperature metric (daily mean) being used in eleven studies. The lack of meteorological data attributed to the paucity of weather stations in rural locations may have contributed to the limited number of studies we used for the meta-analyses. A further implication of widely spaced monitoring stations is that the exposure variable will not capture dynamic changes in temperature that occur in space, resulting in misclassiﬁcation of exposure [ 16]. This misclassiﬁcation is almost certain to be nondifferential (“random”) with respect to the outcome variable, mortality. Thus biased toward the null, relative risks derived from studies included in our meta-analysis may underestimate the true magnitude of heat’s effect on mortality. With respect to the outcome variable, patterns of mortality in response to extreme heat are influenced by the underlying prevalence of temperature-sensitive diseases in a population. Epidemiologic studies of the impacts of extreme heat are most likely to find statistically significant increases in diseases that are already common. Although more common in urban areas, cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of death in rural areas world-wide [22]. Small increases above large, stable baseline rates—if caused by heat—are more likely to be detectable by statistical significance testing. None of the studies we reviewed differentiated among the various causes of death due to cardiovascular disease (i.e., stroke, MI, etc.), an area ripe for further investigation. In addition, although respiratory mortality may be another potential outcome of interest, the current evidence concerning the association between heat and respiratory mortality is relatively weak. For instance, Hashizume et al. [15] found an increase in respiratory mortality only at low temperatures, unrelated to heat; and in their study encompassing a 16-year period, Azongo et al. [37] inferred that respiratory deaths in children were only tangentially related to heat, and more directly related to periods of high precipitation (along with diarrhea and malaria). 5. Conclusions This study assessed heat-related mortality risks among rural populations worldwide through a comprehensive review of epidemiologic literature and meta-analysis. Fourteen epidemiological studies of the association between high temperature and mortality among rural populations were identiﬁed. These studies were conducted in eight countries on four continents between 2006 and 2017. Among the 14 studies, eleven using the daily mean metric for temperature were included in the random effects meta-analysis. The pooled estimates of relative risks (RRs) for all-cause and cardiovascular mortality were 1.030 (95% CI: 1.013, 1.048) and 1.111 (95% CI: 1.045, 1.181) per 1 ◦C increase in daily mean temperature, respectively. We found considerable heterogeneity in studies for cardiovascular mortality (I2 = 59.4%, p < 0.05), but not for all-cause mortality (I2 = 0%, p < 0.05). The combined risk of excess heat-related mortality in rural populations appears to be not smaller than those reported in urban populations, suggesting that being a rural resident does not make one less vulnerable to heat. We also found that the excess mortality risk was roughly 1.8 times higher among the developing nations than the developed nations included in the meta-analysis. Int. J. Environ. Res.