Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 15 Figure 6. Sensitivity analysis for studies conducted in developed countries. Table 5. Effect size estimates of studies in developed countries. Study (Country) Effect Size (95% Confidence Interval) % Weight Hajat (England & Wales) 1.020 1.010 1.030 87.1 Lee (USA) 1.021 0.995 1.047 12.9 Pooled (I2=0.0%; p = 0.000) 1.02 1.011 1.03 100 Note: Weights are from random effects analysis. 4. Discussion Global epidemiological studies of the association between high temperature and mortality have been primarily focused on urban areas, whereas fewer studies to date have examined nonurban areas. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first meta‐analysis of heat‐related mortality risks in rural locations worldwide. In this study, we focused on the endpoints of all‐cause and cardiovascular mortality. We did not include studies of excess mortality during short‐term heat waves, typically lasting a few days or weeks, owing to their inconsistent definitions, designs, and methods [24,25]. For the studies included in our meta‐analysis, the duration of observations ranged from 4 to 27 years (median = 7 years). The selected studies used consistent definitions and research designs in which daily mortality was regressed on daily mean temperature. Daily mean temperature is very useful in assessing the temperature‐mortality relationship [27,44]. Apart from its ability to provide easily interpretable results, it best represents the temperature exposure throughout the whole day and night [45,46]. A study of ambient temperature and mortality in Wuhan, China suggested that daily mean temperature was the best temperature metric for predicting temperature effects on cause‐specific mortality [28]. Further support for use of this metric is that it has the lowest Akaike’s information criterion for quasi‐ poison (Q‐AIC) values, making it a better predictor than the maximum and minimum temperatures [39]. Additionally, it correlates more strongly with mortality than either Tmax or Tmin [15] and shows coherent behavior with respect to mortality at both low and high temperatures [37]. Moreover, it is less prone to measurement error [37]. Interestingly, other studies [20,47] reported similar results regardless of the temperature metric used. In controlling for potential confounding factors, most of the selected studies adjusted for seasonality and time trends. Only a few adjusted for other environmental hazards, such as air pollutants, consistent with the observation of Madrigano [42] that not all studies adjust for ozone as a confounding factor when assessing temperature‐mortality relationships. Exposure to ambient air pollutants, mainly particulate matter (PM) and ozone, have been linked to premature mortality [48], Figure 6. Sensitivity analysis for studies conducted in developed countries. Table 5. Effect size estimates of studies in developed countries. Study (Country) Effect Size (95% Conﬁdence Interval) % Weight Hajat (England & Wales) 1.020 1.010 1.030 87.1 Lee (USA) 1.021 0.995 1.047 12.9 Pooled (I2 = 0.0%; p = 0.000) 1.02 1.011 1.03 100 Note: Weights are from random effects analysis. 4. Discussion Global epidemiological studies of the association between high temperature and mortality have been primarily focused on urban areas, whereas fewer studies to date have examined nonurban areas. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst meta-analysis of heat-related mortality risks in rural locations worldwide. In this study, we focused on the endpoints of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. We did not include studies of excess mortality during short-term heat waves, typically lasting a few days or weeks, owing to their inconsistent deﬁnitions, designs, and methods [ 24,25]. For the studies included in our meta-analysis, the duration of observations ranged from 4 to 27 years (median = 7 years). The selected studies used consistent deﬁnitions and research designs in which daily mortality was regressed on daily mean temperature. Daily mean temperature is very useful in assessing the temperature-mortality relationship [27,44]. Apart from its ability to provide easily interpretable results, it best represents the temperature exposure throughout the whole day and night [45,46]. A study of ambient temperature and mortality in Wuhan, China suggested that daily mean temperature was the best temperature metric for predicting temperature effects on cause-speciﬁc mortality [28]. Further support for use of this metric is that it has the lowest Akaike’s information criterion for quasi-poison (Q-AIC) values, making it a better predictor than the maximum and minimum temperatures [ 39]. Additionally, it correlates more strongly with mortality than either T max or T min [15] and shows coherent behavior with respect to mortality at both low and high temperatures [37]. Moreover, it is less prone to measurement error [37]. Interestingly, other studies [20,47] reported similar results regardless of the temperature metric used. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 1597 10 of 15 In controlling for potential confounding factors, most of the selected studies adjusted for seasonality and time trends. Only a few adjusted for other environmental hazards, such as air pollutants, consistent with the observation of Madrigano [42] that not all studies adjust for ozone as a confounding factor when assessing temperature-mortality relationships. Exposure to ambient air pollutants, mainly particulate matter (PM) and ozone, have been linked to premature mortality [ 48], and thus may confound the temperature-mortality association [26,49]. Ozone is a summer pollutant and climate change is projected to detrimentally affect ozone air quality and consequently increase mortality [50]. The observed correlations of PM concentrations with temperature are weaker than for ozone [51], yet PM has been found to peak in the summer in certain regions, such as the East Coast of the U.S. [26]. Therefore, PM also may be a confounder for the association between temperature and mortality in these regions. Noting that air pollutants and temperature have different biological effects, Guo [47] posited that their effects are likely to be independent of each other. In summary , the results for confounding or effect modification by air pollutants on the temperature-mortality relationship remain mixed [26]. Our results indicate evidence of heat vulnerability in rural areas. We estimated a 3% excess in all-cause mortality and an 11% excess in cardiovascular mortality to be associated with a 1 ◦C increase in mean ambient temperature. In comparing the excess heat-related mortality risk with studies in the world’s urban centers, we used the relative risks from a review [24] and illustrated the RRs in Figure A1 in the Appendix A. As shown in Figure A1, all-cause mortality RRs per 1 ◦C increase in large urban areas ranged from 1.00 to 1.17, with more than half of the estimates falling into the range of 1.01–1.03. Therefore, the excess risks in rural areas are similar to those in urban areas. Our results suggest that rural residents may not be less vulnerable to heat. Rural populations may beneﬁt from the absence of extreme heat or “heat island” in rural environments, attributable to larger numbers of water bodies, trees, greenery ﬁelds, and lower population density [36]. On the other hand, heat vulnerability is not only a product of heat exposure factors but, more importantly, sensitivity and adaptive capacity [52]. Among rural inhabitants, marked differences exist in the components of heat vulnerability, such as lack of health care infrastructure and access to air conditioning, social isolation, informal settlements, and worse baseline health status. Moreover, certain occupational groups residing in rural areas,such as agricultural workers who spend a great deal of time exposed to extreme temperatures, may be a factor that contributes to increased susceptibility of rural populations to heat. Lindeboom et al. [36] noted the possibility of gradual acclimatization as communities adapt to living in warmer climates. Generally , regions within the tropical zone are better acclimatized and less sensitive to heat compared to those in the mid-latitude or temperate zones. This is apparent in higher temperature thresholds observed in tropical climates such as the Northern part of Ghana with a threshold above 30 ◦C [37]. Other tropical places in Nouna, Burkina Faso [35], and Bangladesh[15,34,36]had similarly high temperature thresholds (see Table 1). Temperature thresholds for locations in the mid-latitudes were lower.