Review article Mortality, morbidity and healthcare costs of short-term high temperatures and heatwaves exposure in older populations: a global systematic review and meta-analysis Sabrina Günsche a , Matthew A. Borg a, Olga Anikeeva a, Blesson M. Varghese a, Yannan Li a, Dinesh Bhandari a,b, Jing Li c, Haoran Yang c, Yihan Shi c, Jingwen Liu a, Keith Dear a, Bertram Ostendorf d, Nigel Stocks e, Danny Liew f, Peng Bi a,* a School of Public Health, The University of Adelaide, Australia b School of Nursing and Midwifery, Monash University, Australia c School of Public Health, Shandong Second Medical University, China d School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, Australia e Adelaide Medical School, University of Adelaide, Australia f Faculty of Health, Medicine and Behavioural Sciences, The University of Queensland, Australia ARTICLE INFO Keywords: High temperatures Heatwaves Mortality Morbidity Healthcare costs Older adults Climate zones ABSTRACT Background: Exposure to heat extremes is associated with higher rates of mortality, morbidity and healthcare costs. In the context of population ageing and climate change, which is expected to make extreme heat events more intense, frequent, prolonged, and widespread, understanding their health impacts on older adults is crucial for informing targeted interventions. Methods: This systematic review and meta-analysis searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Scopus, CINAHL, and AgeLine for studies published between January 1, 1990, and March 15, 2025. Original research articles assessing morbidity, mortality, and healthcare costs among older adults during periods of high temperatures or heatwaves were included. Eligible studies used observational designs, such as time series, case-crossover, or case time-series, comparing risks across different exposures or time periods. Reviews, commentaries, grey literature, animal studies, and studies not focused on temperature as the primary exposure were excluded. Risk estimates were extracted from published studies. A random-effects meta-analysis was conducted to pool relative risks of morbidity and mortality, focusing on specific disease categories according to ICD-10 codes, climate zones, and demographic factors. The certainty and strength of the evidence were assessed following the Navigation Guide systematic review methodology framework. The study protocol was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42023423311). Results: Out of 21,610 identified studies, 623 were eligible, spanning six continents and 305 locations classified by K¨oppen climate zones. Of these, 578 were included in the meta-analysis, 43 in a supplementary meta-analysis, and four on healthcare costs were narratively synthesised. A 1◦C temperature rise was associated with higher morbidity (RR 1.016 [CI95% 1.012–1.019]) and mortality (RR 1.022 [CI95% 1.020–1.024]) among older people. The highest morbidity risks were linked to heat-related illnesses, external causes and endocrine diseases, and in tropical climates. Mortality risk was highest for intentional self-harm and external causes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and in Mediterranean climates, with the strongest overall impact on those aged ≥ 85 years. Heatwaves increased morbidity (RR 1.189 [CI95% 1.146–1.233]), particularly for heat-related illnesses and external causes, with the highest overall risk seen in adults aged 75–84 and in subtropical climates.