Epidemiology/econometric approaches are empirical in nature, analyzing time series of historical temperature paired with particular health consequences (e.g., morbidity or mortality) across populations to determine heat-health relationships. These studies often ﬁnd higher rates of cardiovascular and respiratory deaths associated with high ambient temperatures. Future health burdens from heat can be estimated by applying these relati onships to climate model outputs (i.e., daily temperature) under different warming scenarios7,8.E m p i r i - cal approaches are based on real-life outcomes and the range of realistic living conditions, and they can explore the cumulative effects of exposures over multiple days. However, two limitations for climate change projections include 1) assumptions needed to extrapolate results to warmer temperatures than observed in the historical sample9 and 2) ambiguity regarding the role of humidity in heat-health outcomes10. While some epidemiological studies ﬁnd a relationship between mortality in the heat and humidity 11,m o s t ﬁnd minimal associations between humidity and heat-health outcomes12.G i v e nt h a t speciﬁc humidity is robustly expected to increase with global warming, this uncertainty is a key research gap for epidemiology-based projections of future heat stress. Physiology-based studies of future heat stress risk employ relationships between the thermal environment and health outcomes based on human energy balance considerations, with parameters Received: 14 March 2023 Accepted: 1 November 2023 Check for updates 1School of Sustainability, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.2School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 3Department of Earth System Science, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.4Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Palisades, NY, USA. 5Department of Medical Sciences, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.6Heat and Health Research Incubator, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.7Center for Health and the Global Environment, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. e-mail: jvanos@asu.edu Nature Communications| (2023) 14:7653 1 1234567890():,; 1234567890():,; constrained by studies of physiologic processes. In contrast to epidemiology/econometric approaches, physiology-based studies of heathealth outcomes consistently ﬁnd a robust role of atmospheric humidity in heat stress via its modulation of evaporative cooling from sweat10. However, physiology studies are limited in not directly observing health outcomes, such as hospitalization or death, and employ idealized conditions from thermal chamber studies. A range of physiology-based metrics has been applied to project future heat stress. Sherwood & Huber 12 introduced a 35 °C wet bulb temperature (Tw) threshold that would result in death after 6 h of exposure and applied this threshold to project future adaptability limits under varying levels of warming. Since then, numerous studies have used this approach, wherein a psychometric Tw of 35 °C assumes death13–17.T h eT w of 35 °C represents a thermodynamic limit to heat exchange, whereby the human body becomes an adiabatic system, assuming the person is indoors or shaded, unclothed, completely sedentary, fully heat acclimatized, and of average size without thermoregulatory impairments12. As an example of a different metric, Dunne et al. 18 estimated future reductions in labor capacity under different warming scenarios using established guidelines for physical labor under different wet bulb globe temperature levels. While these studies incorporate valuable information about humidity and physiology more realistically than epidemiological studies, their thermal physiology theory remains relatively unsophisticated. These approaches cannot capture complexities and personal characteristics affecting human thermoregulation (e.g., body size, activity levels, clothing, or physiological restrictions — such as sweating — to thermoregulation6,19), which may cause substantial errors. To be useful, heat-health projections should realistically account for factors that increase health risks, such as individual physical characteristics and physiological impairments, as well as interventions that modify or decrease impacts (e.g., lowering metabolic rate; behaviors to reduce exposures). Moreover, models should incorporate ranges in environmental parameters that, together with temperature, result in speciﬁc thermoregulatory effects (e.g., dry, humid, sun/shade, windspeed)19. Physiological and biophysical models offer new opportunities to assess how humans might live and work in a warmer future rather than merely determining the prospects for life and death. Here, we demonstrate a unique approach using physiological principles that align with human thermal responses to heat (e.g., heat strain) to overcome simpliﬁed approaches that miss essential physiologic and behavioral factors in the heat. Heat strain, characterized by thermal, cardiovascular, and renal strain, can lead to adverse health outcomes such as heat exhaustion, heat stroke, or cardiovascular collapse. Risk is higher in people with preexisting illnesses (e.g., cardiovascular disease 20,o ra r e immunocompromised21). Aging 1,21, certain medications 22,a n dd i f f e r - ences in body composition 23 may exacerbate heat strain due to impairments to sweating and/or bloodﬂow or the internal management of body heat storage. Conversely,ﬁtness24, heat acclimatization25,a n d behavioral adaptations26–28 protect against excessive heat strain. This study and others assessing survivability limits (e.g., refs.12,14,16)e s t i - mate deaths from critical high core temperatures causing heat stroke, where a complex cascade of events29 ultimately leads to multiorgan failure30,31 and often death29. Hence, we model heat stroke deaths (hyperthermia) and do not model the two other common types of heatrelated deaths: cardiovascular collapse and renal failure, acknowledging that heat stroke deaths are a fractionof total excess heat-related deaths. A human would experience heat stroke death from hyperthermia on 99.9% of occasions when an individual ’s core temperature (T core) exceeds 43 °C29,32 (see Table1). Thus, we deﬁne the limit of survivability as reaching a Tcore of 43 °C in 3or 6-hour exposure windows to allow for comparison with the T w of 35 °C assumption (heat stroke death after 6 hours). Liveability is the maximum internal heat production, or level of physical activity, that a person can generate without a sustained positive rate of heat storage in the prevailing environment, thus allowing safe, sustained work and play for an extended period. The realistic ﬁnal Tw value for the limits of survivability or liveability will differ by person (age, body size) and climate (dry versus humid; sun versus shade), and thus isﬂexible (i.e., the limits will differ). Hence, while we state a ﬁnal T core at which heat stroke death will almost inevitably occur, our approach does not assume a unique Tw threshold; rather, hundreds of T w thresholds are possible depending on differences in people and conditions modeled, with wide-ranging opportunities of the model in future research. The overarching goal of this study is to improve heat survivability modeling frameworks and approaches used in climate change research and introduce an approach to assess liveability. As an initial step towards these advances, we apply a whole-body human heat exchange model to estimate heat stroke deaths and maximum/safe activity intensity. We focus on two subpopulation types (younger (~18–30 y) and older (>65 y) female adults), considering sweat rate impairments (due to older age) and heat exposures in the sun or shade across an array of air temperature (T air) and humidity levels. We estimate 1) a range of survivability conditions for humans, particularly where deviations from the 35 °C Tw model exist, and 2) the liveability of humans based on levels of physical activity that can be safely carried out without sustained positive heat storage. Finally, we apply the new liveability approach using global climate model (GCM) data to estimate liveability at a global scale, under current and projected climates. An overview of environmental conditions, populations modeled, and assessment types included herein is provided in Fig.1.W ed on o t demonstrate the sensitivity to illness or health status (including acclimatization) in the population, activity velocity, personal cooling strategies, or an ensemble of climate projections— investigations that are worthy future extensions of the methods described in this paper, but out of scope for the present work (see below). Results Survivability All survivability results are pres ented by age (younger versus older female adults) for discrete 3and 6-hour heat exposure durations. These durations are consistent, and thus comparable, with past studies assessing future survivability12 and the highest time resolution data commonly saved from GCM simulations. Results are shown for moderate to extreme combinations of temperature and humidity that may occasionally be reached today, both indoors and outdoors, but more frequently in the future32. Further, we acknowledge that in most circumstances, human agency allows people to seek shade to reduce their heat load 33; hence, we primarily focus on shaded survivability results, allowing a more direct comparison with the T w of 35 °C adaptability hypothesis. The updated physiologic survivability curves — or the environmental limits indicating heat stroke — by exposure duration and age group are shown in Fig. 2 (thick black lines). These environmental ranges, or zones, indicate that survivability are larger for young adults (Fig. 2a). As conditions become drier, the survivability area declines and the curves bend down due to sweating restrictions, a feature not captured by the traditional T w of 35 °C approach. These shifts are observed at the intersection between zones 3 (pink), 4 (purple), and 5 (gray) in Fig. 2, each indicating a different reason for the increase in Tcore towards death— i.e., due to environmental restrictions ( Emaxenv ) (pink), sweating restrictions ( Emaxsweat ) (purple), or both ( Emaxenv and Emaxsweat ) (gray) (see Methods and SM). The 6-hour survival limit for Tw differs depending on the magnitudes of Tair and relative humidity (RH). For example, at an RH of 50%, a healthy young adult can withstand conditions up to 43.3 °C T air (representing a Tw of 33.6 °C). However, under drier conditions (RH of 25%), the same young, healthy adult may withstand a Tair up to 49.9 °C (or a T w of only 31.3 °C). The survivability in these dry conditions is Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5 Nature Communications| (2023) 14:7653 2 impacted by the body’s ability to produce sweat, as visualized by the growth of zone 4 (curve shifting down) in Fig.2 as conditions become drier. For older adults, this downward shift is prominent at a lower Tair and higher RH, where these older individuals can survive only a 6-hour exposure at a Tair of 45.4 °C at 25% RH (Tw of 27.8 °C), which is 3.5 °C Tw lower than for young adults, and 7.2 °C lower than the 35 °C Tw. When expressing the survivability limits of the physiological model in terms of the critical T w within very humid (RH > 90%) and shaded conditions, values are broadly in agreement with the traditional Tw =3 5° Ca s s u m p t i o n(~0 . 7–1.3 °C lower Tw for a 6-hour duration) (see Table 2, Fig. 3). However, in drier conditions, the physiological survival T w limits are much lower (distance between survivability line and Tw =3 5° C l i n e , F i g .3). As such, the most critical differences from the T w = 35 °C assumption occur as conditions become very hot and dry (Tair > 40 °C and RH < 25%). For young adults, the physiological T w survival limit ranges from 25.8 –31.3 °C (or 3.8–9.2 °C lower than 35 °C). These dry-condition limits are reduced further for older adults to a T w of 21.9–27.8 °C (or 7.2 –13.1 °C lower than 35 °C). Further, shaded older adults would not survive a 6-hour exposure beyond Tw =2 1 . 9° C a t 1 0 % R H ( t h u s Tair =4 6 . 4° C ) ; y e t t h e Tw = 35 °C assumption presumes they could endure a 6-hour exposure at a Tair of 60 °C+ at the same RH. Liveability The limit to safe physical activities differs by T air,R H ,a g e ,a n ds u n exposure (Fig.4). Mmax, represented by metabolic equivalents (METs), is higher under cooler, drier conditions.