Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43121-5 A physiological approach for assessing human survivability and liveability to heat in a changing climate Jennifer Vanos 1 , Gisel Guzman-Echavarria2,J a n eW .B a l d w i n3,4, Coen Bongers 5,6,K r i s t i eL .E b i7 &O l l i eJ a y 6 Most studies projecting human survivability limits to extreme heat with climate change use a 35 °C wet-bulb temperature (Tw) threshold without integrating variations in human physiology. This study applies physiological and biophysical principles for young and older adults, in sun or shade, to improve current estimates of survivability and introduce liveability (maximum safe, sustained activity) under current and future climates. Our physiology-based survival limits show a vast underestimation of risks by the 35 °C Tw model in hot-dry conditions. Updated survivability limits correspond to Tw~25.8–34.1 °C (young) and ~21.9–33.7 °C (old)— 0.9–13.1 °C lower than Tw =3 5° C .F o ro l d e r female adults, estimates are ~7.2–1 3 . 1° Cl o w e rt h a n3 5° Ci nd r yc o n d i t i o n s . Liveability declines with sun exposure and humidity, yet most dramatically with age (2.5–3.0 METs lower for older adults). Reductions in safe activity for younger and older adults between the present and future indicate a stronger impact from aging than warming. Adverse health impacts of extreme heat exposure are expected to rise globally due to a warming climate, urban-induced warming, and a growing and aging population 1,2. The concerns for human health, productivity, and well-being are greater in humid climates and for vulnerable populations3–5, such as older adults, unhoused, and/or those with chronic diseases. Therefore, robust models to assess current heat-health impacts and project future risks must incorporate speciﬁc vulnerabilities and diverse environmental contexts6. Methods to project future heat stress risk can be broadly categorized into epidemiology/econometric and physiology-based approaches, which have contrasting bene ﬁts and limitations. Epidemiology/econometric approaches are empirical in nature, analyzing time series of historical temperature paired with particular health consequences (e.g., morbidity or mortality) across populations to determine heat-health relationships. These studies often ﬁnd higher rates of cardiovascular and respiratory deaths associated with high ambient temperatures. Future health burdens from heat can be estimated by applying these relati onships to climate model outputs (i.e., daily temperature) under different warming scenarios7,8.E m p i r i - cal approaches are based on real-life outcomes and the range of realistic living conditions, and they can explore the cumulative effects of exposures over multiple days. However, two limitations for climate change projections include 1) assumptions needed to extrapolate results to warmer temperatures than observed in the historical sample9 and 2) ambiguity regarding the role of humidity in heat-health outcomes10.