Similarly, lying on the right side has higher error than lying on the left side. The most appropriate position for PPG HRV features engineering was the lying position and especially lying on the left side. Various repetitive and cyclic daily living activities such as cycling, walking, and running resulted in a higher error rate in all the HR/HRV features, as shown in Figure 10. The lowest relative error was observed during rest, where the SDNN has a relatively lower error than RMSSD. Mobility, here, walking vs. non-walking, influenced the accuracy of PPG features, as shown in Figure 11. During walking, the relative error was higher than non-walking for all the HR/HRV features. The difference in the relative error between the two activities was 10% for SDNN and 15% for RMSSD. This difference increased further for the frequency and non-linear features as shown in Figure 11. Wearing the device on the dominant or non-dominant hand did not exhibit any significant difference (Appendix A). Sensors 2024, 24, 6826 19 of 33 Sensors 2024 , 24 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 34 Asleep Corsano 0.36 0.58 (<0.001) 0.53 (<0.001) − 0.17 [0.67, − 1.01] Whoop 0.33 0.65 (<0.001) 0.61 (<0.001) 0.05 [0.88, − 0.79] 4.4. Factors Impacting the Performance of a PPG - Based Device The i mpact of coverage within epoch, body posture, daily life activities, epoch length, dominant vs. non - dominant hands, on the performance of the PPG - based device w as explored only for the Corsano device, which provided the raw PPG data. While exploring the impact of these factors, a relative error in percentage is reported for the representative HR/HRV features. We hypothesized that increasing the threshold for quantifying a valid epoch will lead to a more accurate estimation of HR/HRV features. Therefore, we experimented with the coverage threshold for a 5 - min epoch from 40% to 100% and investigated its impact on the performance of HR/HRV features as shown in Figure 8. The r elative error decreased for all the HR/HRV features on increasing the coverage. The error rate for RMSSD and SDNN reduced by approximately around 20% and 10%, respectively. Similar trends were observed for frequency and non - linear domain HRV features. Figure 8 . Impact of coverage within a 5 - min epoch on the accuracy of PPG - derived HR and HRV features. The impact of a variety of body postures, such as upright, reclined, lying left and right, prone, and supine positions, on PPG - derived HR/HRV features was investigated and presented in Figure 9. In all HR/HRV features, a higher error was observed during th e upright and reclined positions. Speciﬁc lying positions played a critical role, such as lying face down in the prone position, which had a higher error rate compared to the supine position for the HR/HRV features. Similarly, lying on the right side has higher error than lying on the left side. The most appropriate position for PPG HRV features engineering was the lying position and especially lying on the left side. Various r epetitive and cyclic daily living activities such as cycling, walking, and running resulted in a higher error rate in all the HR/HRV features, as shown in Figure 10. The lowest relative error was observed during rest, where the SDNN has a relatively lower error than RMSSD. Mobility, Figure 8. Impact of coverage within a 5-min epoch on the accuracy of PPG-derived HR and HRV features. Sensors 2024 , 24 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 34 here , walking vs. non - walking, inﬂuenced the accuracy of PPG features, as shown in Figure 11. During walking, the relative error was higher than non - walking for all the HR/HRV features. The diﬀerence in the relative error between the two activities was 10% fo r SDNN and 15% for RMSSD. This diﬀerence increased further for the frequency and non - linear features as shown in Figure 11. Wearing the device on the dominant or non - dominant hand did not exhibit any signiﬁcant diﬀerence (Appendix A) . Figure 9. Impact of body posture on accuracy of PPG - derived HR and HRV features. The i mpact of epoch length was explored under the awake (Figure 12A), asleep (Figure 12B), and full day periods (Figure 12C). Various epoch lengths, such as the default 5 min, 10 min, 30 min, and 60 min, whole awake time during the day, and whole asleep time du ring the night for all HR and HRV features estimation, were investigated. Interestingly, the correspondence of diﬀerent PPG - derived HR and HRV features to ECG - derived ones behave s diﬀerently under various epoch lengths. The relative error rate increased for the mean HR and mean N - N intervals under both asleep and awake conditions while increasing the epoch length from 5 to 60 min. In contrast, for the majority of the time domain HRV features, the error rate reduced while increasing the epoch lengths. Howe ver, the relative error increased for the SDNN during the asleep period and did not follow the same trend as during the awake period. Similarly, the frequency domain HRV features also resulted in a lower error rate while increasing the epoch length. For no n - linear features such as the sample entropy, the relative error went up with the increase in the epoch length. The a sleep period resulted in the lowest relative error for the RMSSD. Again, SDNN behaved diﬀerently than RMSSD, where the SDNN performed well during the awake period compared to the asleep period. Figure 9. Impact of body posture on accuracy of PPG-derived HR and HRV features. Sensors 2024, 24, 6826 20 of 33 Sensors 2024 , 24 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 21 of 34 Figure 10 . Impact of daily life activities on accuracy of PPG - derived HR and HRV features. Figure 11 . Impact of mobility on accuracy of PPG - derived HR and HRV features. Figure 10. Impact of daily life activities on accuracy of PPG-derived HR and HRV features. Sensors 2024 , 24 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 21 of 34 Figure 10 . Impact of daily life activities on accuracy of PPG - derived HR and HRV features. Figure 11 . Impact of mobility on accuracy of PPG - derived HR and HRV features. Figure 11. Impact of mobility on accuracy of PPG-derived HR and HRV features. Sensors 2024, 24, 6826 21 of 33 The impact of epoch length was explored under the awake (Figure 12A), asleep (Figure 12B), and full day periods (Figure 12C). Various epoch lengths, such as the default 5 min, 10 min, 30 min, and 60 min, whole awake time during the day, and whole asleep time during the night for all HR and HRV features estimation, were investigated. Interestingly, the correspondence of different PPG-derived HR and HRV features to ECG-derived ones behaves differently under various epoch lengths. The relative error rate increased for the mean HR and mean N-N intervals under both asleep and awake conditions while increasing the epoch length from 5 to 60 min. In contrast, for the majority of the time domain HRV features, the error rate reduced while increasing the epoch lengths. However, the relative error increased for the SDNN during the asleep period and did not follow the same trend as during the awake period. Similarly, the frequency domain HRV features also resulted in a lower error rate while increasing the epoch length. For non-linear features such as the sample entropy, the relative error went up with the increase in the epoch length. The asleep period resulted in the lowest relative error for the RMSSD. Again, SDNN behaved differently than RMSSD, where the SDNN performed well during the awake period compared to the asleep period. Sensors 2024 , 24 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 22 of 34 Figure 12 . Impact of epoch length on accuracy of PPG - derived HR and HRV features. 4.5. Test – Retest Reliability of the HR and HRV Features in Daily Life T he t est – retest reliability of the HRV features obtained from Corsano is shown in Table 6.