For the first assessment, the raw data coverage of each device was calculated on an hourly basis as a percentage of the available sample data points in a particular hour to the intended number of samples in this hour. Hourly coverage was further aggregated into full day (across 24 h) and different parts of the day (midnight to 8 a.m., 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., and 8 p.m. to midnight) for reporting. To assess the feasibility of the PPG devices for continuous beat detection in daily life, R-R intervals obtained from the devices were utilized. For simplicity, we use R-R intervals to refer to beat-to-beat intervals for PPG and R-R intervals for ECG. For coverage estimation, a 5-min epoch length was considered for the analysis. The data coverage within this epoch was calculated first, and if there were at least 40% of the data present, this epoch was considered valid. Further, the processed data hourly coverage was estimated by counting the valid epochs within an hour divided by the intended possible number of 5-min epochs in that hour. The hourly coverage was further aggregated into full-day periods (24 h) and specific time intervals for reporting: midnight to 8 a.m., 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., and 8 p.m. to midnight. The charging times of the devices were not adjusted in the coverage calculation to simulate real-world daily life scenarios. 3.2. PPG/ECG Device Data (R-R Intervals) Processing From each device, valid 5-min epoch R-R interval data were further processed before feature engineering. The R-R interval data provided by each device were processed first by sorting it based on the timestamps and removing any duplicates. The R-R intervals were then cleaned by removing the outliers based on unrealistic physiological values and ectopic beats to extract the cleaned normal-to-normal (N-N) intervals for robust feature engineering [38]. The procedure for computing normal-to-normal (N-N) intervals from R-R intervals consisted of several sequential steps. Initially, R-R interval outliers, defined as the ones outside of the 300–2000 ms range [4,39], were identified and replaced with NaN values to clean the data. Subsequently, any NaN values in between the reliable R-R interval values were interpolated using a linear interpolation. This step ensures continuity in the data by filling gaps with interpolated values. Following this, ectopic beats, or abnormal heartbeats, were removed from the interpolated R-R intervals using the Malik method (where the consecutive interval deviation is more than 20% from the previous one) [ 40]. This generated a series of N-N intervals representing the time intervals between consecutive normal heartbeats. However, the ectopic beat removal may introduce new NaN values, necessitating a second interpolation step. The same interpolation method applied earlier was utilized again to fill in any remaining NaN values within the N-N intervals. Due to the validation nature of this work in daily life, the same interpolation technique was used for all features instead of considering different interpolation techniques for each HRV feature [41]. The result is a list of interpolated N-N intervals, where physiological Sensors 2024, 24, 6826 6 of 33 unrealistic and ectopic beats have been systematically removed, and missing values have been filled in. This comprehensive pre-processing approach ensures a robust and adaptable foundation for further heart rate variability (HRV) analysis. However, an ablation study was also conducted to compare the impact of the current interpolation technique with that of no interpolation of HRV features (Appendix B). 3.3. Feature Engineering Cleaned epochs of 5-min N-N intervals from each device were further used to extract HRV features related to time, frequency, and non-linear domains along with the mean value of heart rate and N-N intervals. For the further validation analysis, only representative features from each domain were considered and described in Table 1. More information regarding feature definitions can be found in the work by Shaffer and Ginsberg [4]. Table 1. List of HR and HRV features, along with their definitions, used in the validation analysis. HRV features were extracted from 5-min epochs of N-N intervals. Feature (Units) Domain Definition Mean HR (BPM) Time The average heart rate. Std HR (BPM) Time Standard deviation of heart rate Mean N-N (ms) Time The mean of the N-N intervals, which are the normal-to-normal intervals or the time between successive normal heartbeats. SDNN (ms) Time The standard deviation of the N-N intervals, indicating overall HRV . SDSD (ms) Time The standard deviation of successive differences between adjacent N-N intervals, emphasizing short-term variations. RMSSD (ms) Time The square root of the mean of the sum of the squares of differences between adjacent N-N intervals. CVSD Time Coefficient of variation of successive differences between adjacent N-N intervals. CVNN Time Coefficient of variation equal to the ratio of SDNN divided by Mean N-N intervals LF (ms2) Frequency Low-frequency power spectral density (0.04 to 0.15 Hz) HF (ms2) Frequency High-frequency power spectral density (0.15 to 0.40 Hz) LF/HF Frequency A ratio of LF to HF Sample Entropy Non-linear A non-linear measure that quantifies the complexity or irregularity of the HRV signal 3.4. Factors Affecting the PPG Device Performance In addition to measuring HR and HRV throughout the full day (from midnight to next midnight for each day), it is crucial to consider the influence of the body’s circadian rhythm. This natural rhythm can cause HR/HRV features to vary between day and night, subsequently affecting their accuracy. Particularly during periods of sleep with minimal wrist movement, HRV features tend to be more accurate compared to wakeful periods when daily activities are performed. Morning questionnaire responses were used to crop the data based on subjective asleep and awake timings for each day. Moreover, there are several other factors, including data coverage within epochs used for HRV estimation, postural transitions, activity types, walking vs. non-walking, epoch length, and device position, which can impact the estimation of PPG derived HR/HRV features. Coverage within a 5-min epoch used for HRV estimation: Continuous detection of beats from PPG raw data without gaps is key for reliable HRV feature calculation. The impact of R-R data coverage within 5-min epochs was investigated by increasing the coverage threshold from 40% to 100% with increments of 10%. Postural transitions: Body posture in daily life can also impact the PPG data reliability. Postural information obtained from Vital Patch, such as upright, reclined, lying right, lying Sensors 2024, 24, 6826 7 of 33 left, prone, and supine information, was used to label each 5-min epoch of data used for HR/HRV estimation. A specific posture label was assigned based on its dominance within the 5-min epoch of data in case the participant changed a posture with this 5-min time interval. Activity type: Performance of the PPG devices was also assessed under various daily living activities such as cycling, rest, walking, and running provided by the Corsano device after processing the accelerometer data. Walking vs. non-walking: Specifically, walking detected by the chest-worn device (Vital Patch), which can be more reliable compared to wrist-worn devices, was also used to check the performance of the PPG devices. Epoch length: The impact of epoch length on the error rate of HRV estimation during asleep, awake, and full day periods was explored by using epoch lengths of 10, 30, and 60 min. Apart from these epoch lengths, whole asleep and awake periods were also investigated. Dominant vs. non-dominant hand: Five complete days of data from each collection period from each subject were used to investigate the impact of wearing the PPG devices on dominant vs. non-dominant hands during the asleep, awake, and full day periods. 3.5. Data Consideration for Reliability Assessment of HRV Features Reliability of the HRV features was further explored. For reliability assessment, as shown in Figure 2, the data were considered separately when the device was attached to the dominant and non-dominant hand. Within each period of device attachment, two separate full days (24 h) were considered. To compute reliability, the spearman correlation was performed between HRV estimates obtained from synchronized 5-min epochs between day 1 and day 2. Similarly, a reliability assessment was performed during the first day awake/asleep period with the second day awake/asleep period based on the synchronized 5-min epochs of the HRV features. Sensors 2024 , 24 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 34 Figure 2 . Data consideration for the reliability assessment of the HR and HRV features. 3.6. Algorithms for Beat Detection from Raw PPG and ECG Data Only Corsano provided raw PPG data at 25 Hz frequency. Seven open - source algorithms, which performed well on PPG data in a previous study [33] , were employed to detect beats from the raw PPG data. A short description of each algorithm is provided in Table 2.