Various studies [ 7–9] have validated the utility of PPG in different contexts, including resting, post-exercise, and field conditions, demonstrating its versatility and effectiveness. Despite their promise, the utilization of PPG-based devices in clinical research presents several limitations that must be first understood and addressed before deploying them in clinical trials. A key issue is the impact of individual differences, such as skin tone, age, and gender, on PPG readings [10–14]. Physiological aspects like respiration, venous pulsation, and body temperature can introduce noise in PPG signals [15–18]. Additionally, external factors such as motion artifacts, ambient light, and pressure applied to the skin can affect the accuracy of PPG devices [19–23]. Since this can negatively impact the quality of the data, careful consideration is necessary in the selection and use of PPG devices for health monitoring. PPG-based devices can provide a plethora of features primarily categorized into HR and HRV . HRV features can be further categorized into time domain, frequency domain, and non-linear domain features [4]. The previous studies validating physiological measures from PPG devices have been primarily conducted in controlled environments, which do not represent the challenges encountered in data quality, compliance, and reliability when used in free-living settings. Furthermore, the results reporting accuracy of PPG-derived HRV vary in literature, and there is a paucity of studies evaluating HRV features in free-living conditions. For example, Polar H10 reported good agreement with an ECG-based device for interbeat intervals (R-R intervals) and HR; however, results were not reported for any HRV feature [24]. Polar V800 showed weak absolute agreement (intra class correlation (ICC) < 0.3) with an ECG-based device for time domain HRV features such as root mean square of successive differences (RMSSD) and standard deviation of normal RR (NN) intervals (SDNN) [25]. In another study [26], six wearable devices were evaluated in sleep lab settings, where good agreement was found for HR and poor agreement for RMSSD. The validation of PPG-derived R-R intervals and HR was performed in [27], where analysis was conducted under a resting state and over a very short recording time of 45 s. Another study validated the Samsung smartwatch during awake and asleep state against an ECG-based device using an epoch length of 5-min, showing weak to moderate correlation for HR and HRV during awake state and moderate to strong correlation during asleep state [28]. For precise heartbeat detection, especially under varying cardiac conditions, it is crucial to collect and analyze raw PPG data [29]. Innovative algorithms play a pivotal role in this context. For example, a study employed a peak detection algorithm for smartwatch PPG signals, resulting in significantly enhanced heart rate estimation accuracy in scenarios including atrial fibrillation [30]. A bidirectional recurrent denoising auto-encoder method demonstrated effectiveness in denoising and accentuating PPG waveform features, thereby improving signal quality and heart rate detection [31]. Additionally, the implementation of a novel hybrid motion artifact detection-reduction method using support vector machines has been shown to improve the accuracy of motion artifact detection, which is crucial for real-time vital sign monitoring [ 32]. However, before application of such complex algorithms, there is a need to first understand the baseline performance of traditional algorithms [33]. In this study, we address the gap in the existing research by performing a rigorous validation of PPG-derived physiological measures. Specifically, the objectives are as follows: (1) Assessment of the feasibility of collecting continuous data from PPG devices and their usability in daily life settings. Sensors 2024, 24, 6826 3 of 33 (2) Validation of the HR and HRV derived from PPG devices during awake, asleep, or the full day period compared to that of an ECG sensor. (3) Investigation of impact of data quality, body posture, activity types, epoch length for HRV estimation, use of dominant vs. non-dominant hand on estimation of HR and HRV from PPG devices. (4) Assessment of the test–retest reliability of PPG-derived HR and HRV features in the daily life settings under awake, asleep, and full day periods. (5) Investigation of the performance of seven algorithms to detect beats from the raw PPG waveform signal to identify potentially superior approaches to analyze noisy sensor data in the daily life. 2. Methods 2.1. Study Participants Twenty-five healthy volunteers participated in this non-interventional exploratory study. The clinical study was performed at a single clinical pharmacology unit in Belgium during November 2022 to March 2023. The individuals were 18 years of age or older and determined to be healthy based on physical examination, medical history, and vital signs recorded during screening. The participants were required to comply with study instructions: wear two PPG devices and an ECG sensor simultaneously for two consecutive five-day periods and complete daily morning questionnaires and an end-of-study survey. The participants were excluded from the study if they had current or prior medical conditions, concomitant therapies, and current or prior participation in a clinical study within 28 days of the start of this study. Furthermore, they were also excluded if they had any constraints on sleep schedule, exposure to high frequency equipment during monitoring period, or tattoos on their wrist or torso potentially interfering with PPG/ECG measurements. They were not allowed to perform intensive exercise nor activities submerging devices in water during the monitoring period. The study received approval from the ethics committee of UZA/UAntwerp (3738-BUN B3002022000126). All participants provided written informed consent. This study followed the procedure according to the Declaration of Helsinki. 2.2. Measurement Setup Two PPG-based devices (the Whoop 4.0 [34] and the Corsano CardioWatch 287-1B [35]) and one ECG device (Vital Patch [36]) were used in this study. The Corsano CardioWatch 287-1B (manufacturer: Corsano Healthcare BV , Den Haag, The Netherlands) is a wrist-worn research-based home monitoring device and consists of an accelerometer, PPG sensors, and a battery. The bracelet connects via Bluetooth to a mobile app and then to Corsano’s secure cloud. It sampled acceleration and PPG signals at 25 Hz and used firmware version 4.13. In addition the to raw data, it also provides the following readings: heart rate, R-R intervals, heart rate variability (e.g., RMSSD), respiration rate, activity count, activity type, steps, energy expenditure, and sleep stages. The Whoop 4.0 (manufacturer: Whoop, Boston, MA, USA) is a wrist worn commercial device and captures continuous data from its accelerometer and PPG sensors. The Whoop strap containing the actual measuring device connects via Bluetooth to a mobile app and then to secure cloud storage. The firmware version 41.9.2-11.5 was used for Whoop. The device measures the following: sleep duration, sleep staging, sleep disturbances, sleep efficiency, resting heart rate, heart rate variability (RMSSD), respiratory rate, SpO2, heart rate, R-R intervals, and skin temperature. The Vital Patch device (manufacturer: VitalConnect Inc, San Jose, CA, USA) is adhered to the chest and provides high quality single-lead ECG readings of heart rate and heart rate variability. The VitalConnect device wirelessly transmits data from the Vital Patch sensor to a smartphone and then to the PhysIQ (manufacturer: PhysIQ, Chicago, IL, USA) cloud for storage and analysis [2]. The firmware version used for PhysIQ was 3.5.1.4. The patch is equipped with ECG and accelerometer sensors to measure various physiological Sensors 2024, 24, 6826 4 of 33 parameters such as heart rate, R-R intervals, respiratory rate, body temperature, skin temperature, fall detection, activity (including step count), posture (body position relative to gravity), and sleep stages. 2.3. Study Design This study included two periods of data collection (Figure 1) from daily life for passive home-based remote monitoring. The first data collection period included Day 1 through Day 6. The second data collection period included Day 8 through Day 13. On Day 1, the participants began wearing all three devices (Whoop 4, Corsano Cardiowatch 287-1B, Vital Patch) simultaneously. During the first data collection period, the Vital Patch was worn on the chest. The Whoop 4 was worn on the participant’s non-dominant hand, while the Corsano Cardiowatch 287-1B was worn on their dominant hand. The devices were worn for 5 consecutive days and nights, which included at least 1 weekend night. On Day 8, the participants began the second data collection period wearing all three devices. The Vital Patch was worn in the designated location on the chest as indicated during the site visit. The Corsano Cardiowatch 287-1B was worn on the participant’s non-dominant hand, while the Whoop 4 was worn on their dominant hand. The devices were worn for an additional 5 consecutive days and nights, which included at least 1 weekend night. During the whole data collection period, on every third day participants were instructed to charge the devices for at least three hours in the evening. Sensors 2024 , 24 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 34 disturbances, sleep eﬃciency, resting heart rate, heart rate variability (RMSSD), respiratory rate, SpO2, heart rate, R - R intervals, and skin temperature. The Vital Patch device (manufacturer: VitalConnect Inc, San Jose, CA , USA ) is adhered to the chest and provides high quality single - lead ECG readings of heart rate and heart rate variability. The VitalConnect device wirelessly transmits data from the Vital Patch sensor to a smartphone and then to the PhysIQ (manufacturer: PhysIQ , Chicago , IL , USA) cloud for storage and analysis [2] . The ﬁrmware version used for PhysIQ was 3.5.1.4.