8 | e53977 | p. 2https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX We demonstrated the use of an open-source, modular platform for the collection of high-resolution, raw data directly from smartwatch devices that bypass vendor analytics and cloud services in real-world conditions. In testing this platform, we followed participants’ experiences with using this system and gathered feedback to improve functionality and usability. The data collection and analysis system can be applied to large-scale studies and can be paired with other choices for devices and algorithms. Methods Study Design To investigate the real-world use of HRV monitoring through an automated data collection and processing pipeline in the context of prospective illness detection, we conducted an exploratory observational study combining smartwatch data and health symptoms reported by each individual through a mobile phone app. Participants wore smartwatch devices during normal daily activity and completed surveys of health symptoms. This study reports results from data collected over a period of 8 months. Ethical Considerations The human participant research protocol was reviewed and approved by the RTI International Institutional Review Board (STUDY00022001) and the US Army Medical Research and Development Command Office of Human Research Oversight (E02867.5a). Participants were recruited as a convenience sample from local law enforcement and public health departments. The consent process emphasized that participation was voluntary and that participants could withdraw at any time without penalty. Informed consent was provided by all participants. Personal identifying information was stored in a secured file and kept separate from data collected once enrolled in the study. All smartwatch and survey data were deidentified and labeled by a participant identifier for analysis. The smartwatch was offered to participants as study compensation contingent upon their compliance in providing smartwatch and survey data at least 60% of the time (excluding any technical issues). Wearable and Smartphone Devices Participants were issued Garmin Fenix 6 smartwatches and were offered the use of a Samsung Galaxy A12 study phone or the option to use their phone to pair the watch with the smartphone app for data collection. The SIGMA+ (S+) Health mobile app compatible with iOS and Android devices was used for syncing data from the smartwatch and uploading files to the study database. Data were transferred from the watch to the phone using Bluetooth and from the phone to the cloud-based database using Wi-Fi or cellular connectivity. The data collection architecture is described by Temple et al [20]. Protocol Study demographic and health symptom questionnaires were collected and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture; Vanderbilt University) [21,22]. At the time of study enrollment, participants self-reported demographic information including age, sex, height, weight, race, Hispanic or Latino status, influenza vaccination status, COVID-19 vaccination and booster status, and the presence of any of the following underlying medical conditions: chronic lung disease, moderate to severe asthma, serious heart condition, immunocompromised, severe obesity (BMI of ≥40 kg/m2), cancer, diabetes, chronic kidney disease undergoing dialysis, liver disease, or smoker. Participants completed a daily health symptom survey accessible via a link from the S+ Health app to a REDCap questionnaire. The questionnaire consisted of symptom severity ratings and a text field for additional notes (eg, stressful events and illness details). Symptoms were rated on a scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 3 (severe symptoms) for the following categories: allergies, runny nose, sore throat, cough, shortness of breath, fever, fatigue, headache, body ache, loss of taste and smell, and gastrointestinal symptoms. A symptom score was calculated from a sum of the 11 symptom values reported in the survey. Participants were asked to wear smartwatches continuously during normal daily activities to the extent possible. Participants were requested to sync data between the smartwatch and the S+ Health app at least twice per day. A study coordinator was available to assist participants with technical support during the study and to note any feedback shared by participants on using the smartwatch and the S+ Health app. At the close of the study, participants were invited to complete a survey on their experience. Data Collection and Processing Data Collection Health symptom survey response data were downloaded from REDCap and processed to extract a total symptom score (ie, the sum of the 11 individual symptoms that were rated on a scale of 0 to 3, with 3 indicating severe symptoms) and the self-reported presence of influenza, COVID-19, or other illness. Diagnostic testing and reporting were not strictly required, and laboratory test results were not always available to verify illness reports. Any other self-reported health events provided as survey comments were also noted. IBI, step count, respiration rate, and blood oxygenation data recorded by the Garmin watches were synced to the S+ Health app and uploaded to the AWS cloud (Amazon Web Services, Inc) for storage and computational processing. The analysis in this study focused on step count and IBI measurements. IBI data included (ideally) the interval between each individual heartbeat. Step counts were reported every 1 minute. Data Quality To quantify data volume and data artifacts, raw data fraction (RDF), valid data fraction (VDF), and artifact data fraction (ADF) were defined. Data were averaged into 5-minute epochs based on time of collection within a 24-hour period, with a maximum of 288 epochs per day (24 hours per day×12 epochs per hour). The RDF represents the ratio of the number of unique data point timestamps received to the total number of data points possible during the monitoring period, in this case, the number JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 3https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX of measured epochs relative to the maximum of 12 epochs per hour (hourly measure) or 288 epochs per day (daily measure). Subsets of these measured epochs were labeled as valid if at least 2 step counts were measured and at least 60 valid IBI data points (>0.3 and <1.5 seconds) were measured. Two step count readings were required to ensure that the watch was powered on for at least 60 seconds (ie, the S+ app acquires a one-step count reading every minute). A total of 60 valid IBI points were required to ensure good data quality for calculating HRV during resting states (ie, at least 1 minute of data in each 5-minute epoch is needed for capturing accurate low-frequency responses). A total of 60 valid IBI points in each epoch were required to calculate a representative HR during higher levels of activity when motion artifacts can be significant. The VDF was computed as the ratio of the number of valid epochs to the maximum of 12 epochs per hour (hourly measure) or 288 epochs per day (daily measure). ADF was computed as the ratio of the number of data points removed during data cleaning to the total number of data points in the monitoring period for each data type. A binary daily survey data fraction (SDF) was computed to quantify survey reporting compliance. Data Processing Data were processed to compute “base metrics” and “standardized metrics.” Base metrics included step counts averaged in 5-minute and 30-minute windows, and HR and HRV metrics calculated from 5-minute windows of the IBI time series, including HR, log of high-frequency power (HF), log of low-frequency power (LF), LF/HF, median IBI, SD of IBI, and root mean square of successive IBI differences [23]. The HR and HRV metrics were then standardized using a z score calculation relative to “matched” historic healthy data. Metric standardization was performed to minimize the impact of differences from individual to individual and to incorporate activity matching to minimize the impact of physical activity level in the comparison of metrics. Data were “matched” using the 5and 30-minute step counts by binning into resting (0 step per minute), highly active (140+ steps per minute), and all other step counts within ±30% (or at least 10 steps per minute). Each data point was compared to past data points (“baseline”) at a similar (“matched”) activity level and a measure of the deviation—z score—was calculated for IBI, HF, and LF metrics. We required that the current data be well separated from the baseline data (eg, by at least 24 hours) that it was matched with because a person’s current health state is strongly correlated with their recent (eg, within the past hour) health state. We further required that the baseline exclude data points that were previously marked as anomalous (eg, elevated risk score). We assumed that people were healthy for the first week of data collection unless otherwise noted. We smoothed both the standardized baseline and current data to remove rapid changes from short-term stressors using a 1-hour moving average. We calculated the Mahalanobis distance [24] between the current and healthy baseline smoothed, standardized data to obtain the health risk score. The risk score was initially developed in an influenza-challenge study in which participants were monitored using wearable ECG and physical activity sensors and tested for infection status [16]. Figure 1 illustrates the data processing workflow. Figure 1. Data collection and algorithm workflow. The smartwatch is paired to a smartphone app, and data are uploaded to the data server. Data cleaning corrects sensor-specific artifacts and removes periods where data quality is poor or there is not enough data to make a representative calculation. Metrics are standardized by computing a z score, which corrects for physical activity using an individual’s healthy baseline data and eliminates between-person variation. The output of the algorithm is a risk score. Data metrics and risk scores were stored in a Postgres database. Further details of the operation of the S+ Health app, data flow from watches to SyncHubs to data servers, and the data processing methodology are described by Temple et al [20]. Algorithms, data processing, and visualization were implemented in Python using open-source packages [25-31]. Results Cohort Demographics Health symptoms, illness, and watch data collected from January through August 2023 are reported for 59 participants. The cohort consisted of 17 female participants and 42 male participants with characteristics shown in Table 1. A total of 5 participants left the study early, and in the last 15 weeks of data collection, an additional 7 participants joined. JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 4https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Table 1.