Because the study protocol did not include diagnostic testing, we were unable to confirm the presence of asymptomatic cases. We also explored the occurrence of COVID-19 and influenza cases and whether an accompanying change in risk score was observed. Based on health survey responses, 21 COVID-19 and influenza events were reported. A total of 9 (43%) participants who reported COVID-19 or influenza recorded watch data at the time of the reported illness. Of these, 6 (67%) participants had corresponding increases in risk score (above or below threshold). Table 3 summarizes the number of above-threshold risk scores detected, and influenza and COVID-19 illnesses. Figure 7 illustrates the events reported per month along with metrics of the COVID-19 virus detected in county wastewater [32]. Figure 8 shows time series plots of step, IBI, standardized HRV-derived metrics, S+ health risk scores, and symptom scores for 1 participant who reported a positive test for COVID-19 after initially reporting illness with influenza. Symptoms were reported over a period of 15 days and are shown for respiratory-specific and general (any type) symptoms. Additionally, illness reports for influenza and COVID-19 are annotated on the bottom panel of Figure 8. An elevated risk score preceding and coinciding with reported symptoms of illness is observed. Table 3. Summary of self-reported influenza and COVID-19 illness or symptoms and elevated risk score events from a convenience sample of 59 individuals who provided smartwatch and health survey data between January 2023 and the end of August 2023. Elevated risk scores were detected from analysis of heart rate variability–derived and activity metrics. Count, n (%)Source Elevated risk score (n=29) 12 (41)Symptoms reported 13 (45)No symptoms reported 4 (14)No survey submitted Influenza or COVID-19 illness (n=21) 6 (29)Increase in risk score 3 (14)No increase in risk score 12 (57)No smartwatch data Figure 7. The number of influenza and COVID-19 illness and elevated risk score events observed by month and normalized US county metrics showing the percent of wastewater samples with detectable COVID-19 virus (noise added). Elevated risk scores were detected from analysis of heart rate variability-derived and activity metrics of a convenience sample of 59 participants who provided smartwatch and health survey data between January 2023 and the end of August 2023. Influenza and COVID-19 illnesses were self-reported by participants through daily surveys and may or may not have been ascertained by diagnostic tests. JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 11https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Figure 8. Metrics from a participant who initially reported influenza and ultimately tested positive for COVID-19 in August 2023. Elevated risk scores relative to a threshold of 15 (dotted gray line) are observed prior to and coinciding with reported symptoms. The risk scores were detected from analysis of heart rate variability-derived and activity metrics. Plots of step count, IBI, RDF, VDF, IBI ADF, standardized IBI metrics, risk score, and health survey symptom score are shown for a period of 1 month. Markers indicating self-reported influenza and COVID-19 illnesses are included alongside numeric scores of general (any type) and respiratory-related symptoms. The symptom scores were calculated from symptom ratings on a scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 3 (severe symptoms) for the following categories: allergies, runny nose, sore throat, cough, shortness of breath, fever, fatigue, headache, body ache, loss of taste and smell, and gastrointestinal symptoms. ADF: artifact data fraction; HF: log of high-frequency power; IBI: interbeat interval; IBI: interbeat interval; LF: log of low-frequency power; RDF: raw data fraction; VDF: valid data fraction; z: standardized metric. Discussion Principal Results This exploratory study included continuous monitoring of individuals to determine HRV metrics over a baseline (healthy) window, which provides insight into long-term changes in HRV and a reference range for each metric. For the data collection and analysis, we used a standalone, vendor-agnostic modular system that is scalable to large cohorts [20]. We used the multivariate anomaly score (risk score) calculated relative to the baseline period as an indicator of exposure to stressors. The risk score was originally developed and tested in an influenza-challenge study in which participants were monitored before, during, and after inoculation, and the infection status was confirmed by a polymerase chain reaction test [16]. In this study, our objective was to assess if the risk score calculated using metrics extracted from PPG sensors during free-living conditions shows promise as an indicator of respiratory infection. Data Missingness and Artifacts The observed RDF and SDF illustrate the wide variation in device compliance and study engagement in free-living conditions over long monitoring periods. The levels of device compliance and survey compliance were not necessarily related within participants (Figures 2 and 5). Technical issues with the smartwatch or use of the mobile phone app were encountered and may have contributed to reduced user compliance. These were mitigated with replacement watches, personalized technical support, and app updates. In general, using multiple data sources such as smartwatches and surveys comes with the risk of JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 12https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX unbalanced data compliance, which should be considered in study protocols that rely on both data sources. Along with RDF, we also report VDF and ADF. Inherent in data collection is the possibility that the VDF may be relatively low even when the RDF over a period is relatively high. This could occur in a situation where the watch is recording data but is not actually being worn. For example, in some of these cases, an increase in IBI ADF can indicate artifactual data recording (Figures 2-4). Cohort Observations The interpretation of risk algorithm performance depends fundamentally on wear compliance and quality of ground truth information, in this case, symptom and illness reporting compliance. A total of 12 (57%) influenza and COVID-19 cases reported did not have accompanying smartwatch data. Of the 9 (43%) that did have watch data, 6 (67%) were observed to have an increase in risk score. Influenza and COVID-19 infections were identified from self-reports rather than by diagnostic tests; and thus, there may have been cases that were not reported and reported cases that were not in actuality influenza or COVID-19. We explored the prospective use of health anomaly detection based on a previously determined parameter threshold for this algorithm [16]. A total of 12 (48%) elevated risk score events relative to this threshold that included survey data also reported symptoms or illness. The choice of value for the threshold parameter was based on the results of a previous study that used ECG measurements of patients with confirmed infection status, and thus may not be optimally tuned for this PPG sensor data set. The small sample size and lack of diagnostic tests to confirm self-reported illnesses limited statistical analysis and the ability to explore threshold optimization in this study. Similarly, we did not have enough cases to investigate the application of the algorithm to health anomalies other than influenza, the characteristics of which may or may not be adequately detected. We did observe similar trends in the number of elevated risk scores and number of reported influenza and COVID-19 cases per month, which were qualitatively similar to trends in COVID-19 virus detected in county wastewater (Figure 7). Approximately 47% of influenza and 40%-45% of COVID-19 cases are asymptomatic [33,34]. Without a rigid testing protocol in our study design, and without symptoms to prompt participants to seek testing, we were unable to confirm asymptomatic cases. Figure 8 illustrates a symptomatic infection case that was initially presumed to be influenza but was later confirmed to be COVID-19 through testing. This example highlights the importance of ground truth data for research interpretation and that, in the absence of health testing, illness presence or type is not necessarily known. Vaccination status for influenza and COVID-19, including COVID-19 boosters, was self-reported at the time of study onboarding, which preceded the start of the monitoring period reported in this paper by 2 months. Updates to vaccination status were not requested during the study. Therefore, it is possible that additional vaccinations were obtained by participants and not recorded in the cohort characteristics listed in Table 1. Incorporation of Other Algorithms and Sensors The data collection and analysis platform can incorporate other algorithms that use HRV metrics obtained from physiological sensor data to detect illness. Similarly, other physiological sensors could be chosen for data collection. The modular nature of the software platform and the use of transparent, open-source routines for data cleaning and metrics extraction, bypassing algorithms proprietary to device vendors, supports the incorporation of other analytical approaches or wearable devices. Limitations We have discussed the limitations of cohort size and ground truth uncertainty for the assessment of illness detection in this study. Additionally, some technical challenges were reported by participants, which were mitigated by watch replacements and smartphone app updates. A further shortcoming is the lack of racial diversity in the study cohort. Recent research indicates that the accuracy of HR measured by most leading wearable optical sensors is not significantly affected by skin tone, although devices themselves vary in their measurement accuracy, particularly during activity [35].