Original Paper Continuous Monitoring of Heart Rate Variability in Free-Living Conditions Using Wearable Sensors: Exploratory Observational Study Pooja Gaur, PhD; Dorota S Temple, PhD; Meghan Hegarty-Craver, PhD; Matthew D Boyce, BS; Jonathan R Holt, PhD; Michael F Wenger, BS; Edward A Preble, PhD; Randall P Eckhoff, BS; Michelle S McCombs, BS; Hope C Davis-Wilson, PhD; Howard J Walls, PhD; David E Dausch, PhD Research Triangle Institute, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States Corresponding Author: Pooja Gaur, PhD Research Triangle Institute 3040 East Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park, NC, 27709 United States Phone: 1 9192481458 Email: pgaur@rti.org Abstract Background: Wearable physiological monitoring devices are promising tools for remote monitoring and early detection of potential health changes of interest. The widespread adoption of such an approach across communities and over long periods of time will require an automated data platform for collecting, processing, and analyzing relevant health information. Objective: In this study, we explore prospective monitoring of individual health through an automated data collection, metrics extraction, and health anomaly analysis pipeline in free-living conditions over a continuous monitoring period of several months with a focus on viral respiratory infections, such as influenza or COVID-19. Methods: A total of 59 participants provided smartwatch data and health symptom and illness reports daily over an 8-month window. Physiological and activity data from photoplethysmography sensors, including high-resolution interbeat interval (IBI) and step counts, were uploaded directly from Garmin Fenix 6 smartwatches and processed automatically in the cloud using a stand-alone, open-source analytical engine. Health risk scores were computed based on a deviation in heart rate and heart rate variability metrics from each individual’s activity-matched baseline values, and scores exceeding a predefined threshold were checked for corresponding symptoms or illness reports. Conversely, reports of viral respiratory illnesses in health survey responses were also checked for corresponding changes in health risk scores to qualitatively assess the risk score as an indicator of acute respiratory health anomalies. Results: The median average percentage of sensor data provided per day indicating smartwatch wear compliance was 70%, and survey responses indicating health reporting compliance was 46%. A total of 29 elevated health risk scores were detected, of which 12 (41%) had concurrent survey data and indicated a health symptom or illness. A total of 21 influenza or COVID-19 illnesses were reported by study participants; 9 (43%) of these reports had concurrent smartwatch data, of which 6 (67%) had an increase in health risk score. Conclusions: We demonstrate a protocol for data collection, extraction of heart rate and heart rate variability metrics, and prospective analysis that is compatible with near real-time health assessment using wearable sensors for continuous monitoring. The modular platform for data collection and analysis allows for a choice of different wearable sensors and algorithms. Here, we demonstrate its implementation in the collection of high-fidelity IBI data from Garmin Fenix 6 smartwatches worn by individuals in free-living conditions, and the prospective, near real-time analysis of the data, culminating in the calculation of health risk scores. To our knowledge, this study demonstrates for the first time the feasibility of measuring high-resolution heart IBI and step count using smartwatches in near real time for respiratory illness detection over a long-term monitoring period in free-living conditions. (JMIR Form Res 2024;8:e53977) doi: 10.2196/53977 JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 1https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX KEYWORDS heart rate variability; physiological monitoring; wearable sensors; smartwatch; PPG; photoplethysmography; monitoring; physiological; heart rate; wearable; wearables; sensor; sensors; observation study; wearable devices; devices; remote monitoring; community; data platform; data collection; health risk Introduction Background The use of wearable sensors for monitoring health status has grown in popularity, in applications ranging from fitness to illness management [1]. Wearable sensors have the potential to provide continuous, near–real-time monitoring of human physiology with minimal discomfort during daily life activities [2]. Among wearable sensors, commercial-off-the-shelf devices, such as smartwatches and smart rings, that integrate heart rate (HR), blood oxygen, and activity monitors are popular devices for use in real-world physiological monitoring because of their already broad owner base and form factor that is compatible with long-term wear [3]. Heart rate variability (HRV) provides insight into the interplay between sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system in response to external stressors [4]. HRV measurement using photoplethysmography (PPG) sensors, such as those embedded in smartwatches, has been tested against and found to correspond with gold-standard electrocardiogram (ECG) measurements [5]. Although PPGand ECG-derived HRV metrics have generally good agreement, PPG-based measures can differ from ECG-based measures in the presence of physical activity, cold exposure, and other factors [6-8]. Wearable sensors provide an opportunity for personalized detection of health changes relative to an individual’s baseline state, which can differ from normalized or population-level reference values [9-11]. Interbeat interval (IBI) time-series data can be used to derive HR and HRV metrics. Changes in a person’s HR and HRV over time can signal illness, infection, and other health conditions [12-14]. Analysis of HR-based measures recorded by smartwatches and smart ring sensors has shown that these measures can indicate the presence of respiratory infections, such as influenza and COVID-19, before symptoms start [15-19]. One COVID-19 detection study retrospectively analyzed data from smartwatch users over a period of several months using HR and step summary data provided by the device vendor [18]. Another retrospective study used summary HR, HRV, respiration rate, temperature, and activity data recorded from smart ring users, although HR, HRV, and respiration rate were only available during sleep periods [19]. A prospective COVID-19 monitoring study of health care workers focusing primarily on existing smartwatch users collected vendor-provided HRV metrics over a period of 5 months [17]. Although vendor-provided HRV measures can be useful to monitor health trends, high-resolution IBI and activity data are desirable to enable transparent, open-source calculation of a full set of HRV metrics and their use in a broad range of algorithms. A long-term COVID-19 monitoring study of active military personnel retrieved average HR and step-counts data from the device-vendor cloud platform for offline processing, but the availability of these data through the cloud was typically delayed by 24-48 hours relative to the time of device recording [15]. Goals of the Study Unlike the aforementioned studies, we report results from participants in the community under free-living conditions who were recruited independently of their smartwatch ownership or use status. That is, we include results from participants who may or may not have been familiar with smartwatch and accompanying mobile phone app use prior to involvement in this study. The validity of continuous monitoring using 4 wearable sensors in a simulated free-living environment compared with 2 reference devices found that HR accuracy was generally high when not confounded by physical activity [2]. In this study, we used 1 wearable device to collect data in actual free-living environments over a monitoring period of 8 months. Additionally, the data presented in this paper included each IBI recorded by PPG-based sensors, along with step counts, blood oxygen level, and respiration rate. The high-resolution data were processed prospectively in real time using open-source calculations to yield HR and HRV metrics. Study-provided Garmin Fenix 6 smartwatches paired to iOS and Android smartphones running a custom mobile app were used for long-term continuous monitoring. We explored the application of these tools to the monitoring of a cohort of 59 individuals and reported observations related to the study protocol and data set. The objectives for the study were to (1) quantify the quality of data (data missingness and artifacts) collected in free-living conditions, (2) present examples of HR and HRV-derived metrics during a baseline healthy period, (3) use the healthy baseline as the foundation for the standardization of HRV metrics and qualitatively assess if the multivariable anomaly score (health risk score) shows promise as an indicator of viral respiratory illness, and (4) demonstrate the data collection, metrics extraction, and analysis through an automated processing pipeline for prospective monitoring. The health risk score is predicated on a difference between physiological metrics relative to the healthy baseline period, where we implement activity matching to compare current and baseline metrics within similar activity bins. Activity matching is an uncommon feature of this type of data analysis, as most device vendors do not provide metrics corrected for the level of activity. Of particular interest in the study was the response to airborne pathogens, such as COVID-19, influenza, and other respiratory viruses, self-reported by participants through health survey questionnaires. Health risk scores exceeding a predefined threshold were checked for corresponding symptom or illness reports. Conversely, reports of viral respiratory illnesses in health survey responses were checked for corresponding changes in health risk scores to qualitatively assess the score as an indicator of acute respiratory health anomaly. JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 2https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX We demonstrated the use of an open-source, modular platform for the collection of high-resolution, raw data directly from smartwatch devices that bypass vendor analytics and cloud services in real-world conditions. In testing this platform, we followed participants’ experiences with using this system and gathered feedback to improve functionality and usability. The data collection and analysis system can be applied to large-scale studies and can be paired with other choices for devices and algorithms. Methods Study Design To investigate the real-world use of HRV monitoring through an automated data collection and processing pipeline in the context of prospective illness detection, we conducted an exploratory observational study combining smartwatch data and health symptoms reported by each individual through a mobile phone app. Participants wore smartwatch devices during normal daily activity and completed surveys of health symptoms. This study reports results from data collected over a period of 8 months. Ethical Considerations The human participant research protocol was reviewed and approved by the RTI International Institutional Review Board (STUDY00022001) and the US Army Medical Research and Development Command Office of Human Research Oversight (E02867.5a). Participants were recruited as a convenience sample from local law enforcement and public health departments. The consent process emphasized that participation was voluntary and that participants could withdraw at any time without penalty. Informed consent was provided by all participants. Personal identifying information was stored in a secured file and kept separate from data collected once enrolled in the study. All smartwatch and survey data were deidentified and labeled by a participant identifier for analysis. The smartwatch was offered to participants as study compensation contingent upon their compliance in providing smartwatch and survey data at least 60% of the time (excluding any technical issues). Wearable and Smartphone Devices Participants were issued Garmin Fenix 6 smartwatches and were offered the use of a Samsung Galaxy A12 study phone or the option to use their phone to pair the watch with the smartphone app for data collection. The SIGMA+ (S+) Health mobile app compatible with iOS and Android devices was used for syncing data from the smartwatch and uploading files to the study database. Data were transferred from the watch to the phone using Bluetooth and from the phone to the cloud-based database using Wi-Fi or cellular connectivity.