8 | e53977 | p. 8https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Figure 5. Self-reported health symptoms and illness SDF per participant for a convenience sample of 59 individuals who provided data between January 2023 and the end of August 2023. Labels on the y-axis indicate the percentage of daily survey reports submitted relative to the number of days in the 8-month monitoring period per participant. The color map indicates symptom survey reports submitted per day per participant. The participant order along the y-axis corresponds to the y-axis participant ordering shown in Figure 2. Symbols × indicate participants who left the study and + indicate participants who joined in the last 15 weeks of the study. SDF: survey data fraction. Data Recording Challenges During the 8-month monitoring period, 6 participants reported smartwatch-related issues and were offered replacement devices. Some participants experienced difficulty using the mobile phone app to upload data from the smartwatch. A total of 10 mobile phone app updates (combined iOS and Android) were released to mitigate data-syncing issues, including updates to the Garmin software development toolkit, and to improve user experience. Individual help was offered to participants who required assistance in updating the app on their phones. Additional challenges to data recording included a dislike of wearing the smartwatch, reported by 1 participant, and a prolonged loss of a charging cable, reported by another participant. Technical issues with either the smartwatch or app and diminished study engagement negatively impacted the data and survey responses shown in Figures 2 and 5. Participant Feedback A participant experience survey was distributed at the end of the monitoring period. Of the 43 (73%) participants who completed the survey, 16 (37%) identified as being not at all familiar with using a smartwatch prior to joining this study. Regarding the smartwatch, 30 (70%) responded that the watch was a good size, 7 (16%) responded that it was not easy to use, and the most liked features of the watch were access to health JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 9https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX data (n=15, 35%), activity tracking (n=9, 21%), and sleep tracking (n=8, 19%). Issues with data syncing and mobile app functionality were the most commonly reported problems. Figure 6 shows example base and standardized HRV metrics, IBI ADF, and risk scores calculated in 5-minute epochs and hourly averages of RDF and VDF extracted from 2 weeks of a cleaned data set. Health survey responses during this time window did not report illness or symptoms. The metrics are shown as a representation of healthy baseline data (ie, z scores above –3 and no reported symptoms). These data also exemplify high smartwatch wear compliance and symptom survey compliance, with occasional short gaps in continuous monitoring. Figure 6. Example metrics measured from a participant over a period of 2 weeks in April 2023. All values were calculated in 5-minute epochs except symptom scores, which were calculated from self-report of individual symptoms. RDF and VDF are averaged by hour. The risk score remained below the threshold (dotted gray line) and symptom scores were zero for general and respiratory symptom categories throughout the 2 weeks. The risk scores were detected from analysis of heart rate variability-derived and activity metrics. The symptom scores were calculated from symptom ratings on a scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 3 (severe symptoms) for the following categories: allergies, runny nose, sore throat, cough, shortness of breath, fever, fatigue, headache, body ache, loss of taste and smell, and gastrointestinal symptoms. ADF: artifact data fraction (calculated for IBI metric); HF: log of high-frequency power; IBI: interbeat interval; LF: log of low-frequency power; RDF: raw data fraction; RMSSD: root mean square of consecutive heartbeat intervals; SDNN: standard deviation of IBI; Step: step count; VDF: valid data fraction; z: standardized metric. JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 10https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Cohort Observations We explored the correspondence of reported symptoms or illness with the occurrence of elevated risk scores based on a threshold value of 15. This is the threshold value for which the algorithm demonstrated high sensitivity and no false alarms in the previous influenza-challenge study [16]. During the 8-month monitoring period of this study, 29 elevated score events were noted, of which 25 had accompanying survey data. Of these, 12 (48%) reported symptoms or illness of any type, and 13 (52%) did not report any symptoms. Because the study protocol did not include diagnostic testing, we were unable to confirm the presence of asymptomatic cases. We also explored the occurrence of COVID-19 and influenza cases and whether an accompanying change in risk score was observed. Based on health survey responses, 21 COVID-19 and influenza events were reported. A total of 9 (43%) participants who reported COVID-19 or influenza recorded watch data at the time of the reported illness. Of these, 6 (67%) participants had corresponding increases in risk score (above or below threshold). Table 3 summarizes the number of above-threshold risk scores detected, and influenza and COVID-19 illnesses. Figure 7 illustrates the events reported per month along with metrics of the COVID-19 virus detected in county wastewater [32]. Figure 8 shows time series plots of step, IBI, standardized HRV-derived metrics, S+ health risk scores, and symptom scores for 1 participant who reported a positive test for COVID-19 after initially reporting illness with influenza. Symptoms were reported over a period of 15 days and are shown for respiratory-specific and general (any type) symptoms. Additionally, illness reports for influenza and COVID-19 are annotated on the bottom panel of Figure 8. An elevated risk score preceding and coinciding with reported symptoms of illness is observed. Table 3. Summary of self-reported influenza and COVID-19 illness or symptoms and elevated risk score events from a convenience sample of 59 individuals who provided smartwatch and health survey data between January 2023 and the end of August 2023. Elevated risk scores were detected from analysis of heart rate variability–derived and activity metrics. Count, n (%)Source Elevated risk score (n=29) 12 (41)Symptoms reported 13 (45)No symptoms reported 4 (14)No survey submitted Influenza or COVID-19 illness (n=21) 6 (29)Increase in risk score 3 (14)No increase in risk score 12 (57)No smartwatch data Figure 7. The number of influenza and COVID-19 illness and elevated risk score events observed by month and normalized US county metrics showing the percent of wastewater samples with detectable COVID-19 virus (noise added). Elevated risk scores were detected from analysis of heart rate variability-derived and activity metrics of a convenience sample of 59 participants who provided smartwatch and health survey data between January 2023 and the end of August 2023. Influenza and COVID-19 illnesses were self-reported by participants through daily surveys and may or may not have been ascertained by diagnostic tests. JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 11https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Figure 8. Metrics from a participant who initially reported influenza and ultimately tested positive for COVID-19 in August 2023. Elevated risk scores relative to a threshold of 15 (dotted gray line) are observed prior to and coinciding with reported symptoms. The risk scores were detected from analysis of heart rate variability-derived and activity metrics. Plots of step count, IBI, RDF, VDF, IBI ADF, standardized IBI metrics, risk score, and health survey symptom score are shown for a period of 1 month. Markers indicating self-reported influenza and COVID-19 illnesses are included alongside numeric scores of general (any type) and respiratory-related symptoms. The symptom scores were calculated from symptom ratings on a scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 3 (severe symptoms) for the following categories: allergies, runny nose, sore throat, cough, shortness of breath, fever, fatigue, headache, body ache, loss of taste and smell, and gastrointestinal symptoms. ADF: artifact data fraction; HF: log of high-frequency power; IBI: interbeat interval; IBI: interbeat interval; LF: log of low-frequency power; RDF: raw data fraction; VDF: valid data fraction; z: standardized metric. Discussion Principal Results This exploratory study included continuous monitoring of individuals to determine HRV metrics over a baseline (healthy) window, which provides insight into long-term changes in HRV and a reference range for each metric. For the data collection and analysis, we used a standalone, vendor-agnostic modular system that is scalable to large cohorts [20].