JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 11https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX Figure 8. Metrics from a participant who initially reported influenza and ultimately tested positive for COVID-19 in August 2023. Elevated risk scores relative to a threshold of 15 (dotted gray line) are observed prior to and coinciding with reported symptoms. The risk scores were detected from analysis of heart rate variability-derived and activity metrics. Plots of step count, IBI, RDF, VDF, IBI ADF, standardized IBI metrics, risk score, and health survey symptom score are shown for a period of 1 month. Markers indicating self-reported influenza and COVID-19 illnesses are included alongside numeric scores of general (any type) and respiratory-related symptoms. The symptom scores were calculated from symptom ratings on a scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 3 (severe symptoms) for the following categories: allergies, runny nose, sore throat, cough, shortness of breath, fever, fatigue, headache, body ache, loss of taste and smell, and gastrointestinal symptoms. ADF: artifact data fraction; HF: log of high-frequency power; IBI: interbeat interval; IBI: interbeat interval; LF: log of low-frequency power; RDF: raw data fraction; VDF: valid data fraction; z: standardized metric. Discussion Principal Results This exploratory study included continuous monitoring of individuals to determine HRV metrics over a baseline (healthy) window, which provides insight into long-term changes in HRV and a reference range for each metric. For the data collection and analysis, we used a standalone, vendor-agnostic modular system that is scalable to large cohorts [20]. We used the multivariate anomaly score (risk score) calculated relative to the baseline period as an indicator of exposure to stressors. The risk score was originally developed and tested in an influenza-challenge study in which participants were monitored before, during, and after inoculation, and the infection status was confirmed by a polymerase chain reaction test [16]. In this study, our objective was to assess if the risk score calculated using metrics extracted from PPG sensors during free-living conditions shows promise as an indicator of respiratory infection. Data Missingness and Artifacts The observed RDF and SDF illustrate the wide variation in device compliance and study engagement in free-living conditions over long monitoring periods. The levels of device compliance and survey compliance were not necessarily related within participants (Figures 2 and 5). Technical issues with the smartwatch or use of the mobile phone app were encountered and may have contributed to reduced user compliance. These were mitigated with replacement watches, personalized technical support, and app updates. In general, using multiple data sources such as smartwatches and surveys comes with the risk of JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 12https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX unbalanced data compliance, which should be considered in study protocols that rely on both data sources. Along with RDF, we also report VDF and ADF. Inherent in data collection is the possibility that the VDF may be relatively low even when the RDF over a period is relatively high. This could occur in a situation where the watch is recording data but is not actually being worn. For example, in some of these cases, an increase in IBI ADF can indicate artifactual data recording (Figures 2-4). Cohort Observations The interpretation of risk algorithm performance depends fundamentally on wear compliance and quality of ground truth information, in this case, symptom and illness reporting compliance. A total of 12 (57%) influenza and COVID-19 cases reported did not have accompanying smartwatch data. Of the 9 (43%) that did have watch data, 6 (67%) were observed to have an increase in risk score. Influenza and COVID-19 infections were identified from self-reports rather than by diagnostic tests; and thus, there may have been cases that were not reported and reported cases that were not in actuality influenza or COVID-19. We explored the prospective use of health anomaly detection based on a previously determined parameter threshold for this algorithm [16]. A total of 12 (48%) elevated risk score events relative to this threshold that included survey data also reported symptoms or illness. The choice of value for the threshold parameter was based on the results of a previous study that used ECG measurements of patients with confirmed infection status, and thus may not be optimally tuned for this PPG sensor data set. The small sample size and lack of diagnostic tests to confirm self-reported illnesses limited statistical analysis and the ability to explore threshold optimization in this study. Similarly, we did not have enough cases to investigate the application of the algorithm to health anomalies other than influenza, the characteristics of which may or may not be adequately detected. We did observe similar trends in the number of elevated risk scores and number of reported influenza and COVID-19 cases per month, which were qualitatively similar to trends in COVID-19 virus detected in county wastewater (Figure 7). Approximately 47% of influenza and 40%-45% of COVID-19 cases are asymptomatic [33,34]. Without a rigid testing protocol in our study design, and without symptoms to prompt participants to seek testing, we were unable to confirm asymptomatic cases. Figure 8 illustrates a symptomatic infection case that was initially presumed to be influenza but was later confirmed to be COVID-19 through testing. This example highlights the importance of ground truth data for research interpretation and that, in the absence of health testing, illness presence or type is not necessarily known. Vaccination status for influenza and COVID-19, including COVID-19 boosters, was self-reported at the time of study onboarding, which preceded the start of the monitoring period reported in this paper by 2 months. Updates to vaccination status were not requested during the study. Therefore, it is possible that additional vaccinations were obtained by participants and not recorded in the cohort characteristics listed in Table 1. Incorporation of Other Algorithms and Sensors The data collection and analysis platform can incorporate other algorithms that use HRV metrics obtained from physiological sensor data to detect illness. Similarly, other physiological sensors could be chosen for data collection. The modular nature of the software platform and the use of transparent, open-source routines for data cleaning and metrics extraction, bypassing algorithms proprietary to device vendors, supports the incorporation of other analytical approaches or wearable devices. Limitations We have discussed the limitations of cohort size and ground truth uncertainty for the assessment of illness detection in this study. Additionally, some technical challenges were reported by participants, which were mitigated by watch replacements and smartphone app updates. A further shortcoming is the lack of racial diversity in the study cohort. Recent research indicates that the accuracy of HR measured by most leading wearable optical sensors is not significantly affected by skin tone, although devices themselves vary in their measurement accuracy, particularly during activity [35]. A 2019 survey of 4272 individuals reported only modest differences in smartwatch use across race, ethnicity, and sex, but larger disparities based on income level [36]. This has raised the additional concern of socioeconomic bias in wearables health monitoring [37]. Algorithm biases based on sex and age have also been reported [19]. To improve health equity, future studies should strive to include a more balanced representation of participants. Comparison With Prior Work Previous research reporting on the use of wearables sensors for long-term health monitoring has obtained data processed by vendor-provided analytics, included a cohort based heavily on a smartwatch or smart ring ownership or on active military status, or performed analysis retrospectively [15,17-19]. To our knowledge, this is the first study to collect high-resolution IBI data recorded from the device in a community-based civilian sample in free-living conditions for prospective analysis that does not require accessing the device vendor cloud and is compatible with near real-time monitoring. Other long-term monitoring studies have incorporated surveys along with wearables data [15,17-19], but to our knowledge, studies have not reported metrics for detailed quantification of data collection, missingness, and quality for the wearable and survey data. Neglecting to wear the device during periods of illness, which we observed in our cohort, has also been reported in a previous study in which only 32 of 114 (28%) participants wore their devices around the time of infection [18]. A study of 30,529 participants spanning 11.5 weeks in the spring of 2020 reported that only 8.7% of participants who experienced symptoms followed up with a COVID-19 test, reinforcing the reality that diagnostic testing may not always be available or used when monitoring population health [37]. Conclusions We have described the application of a data collection and analysis pipeline for continuous wearable–based physiological monitoring and health risk score assessment under free-living conditions over a period of 8 months. This study used JMIR Form Res 2024 | vol. 8 | e53977 | p. 13https://formative.jmir.org/2024/1/e53977 (page number not for citation purposes) Gaur et alJMIR FORMATIVE RESEARCH XSL•FO RenderX commercial-off-the-shelf sensors and open-source algorithms that provided updated health scores every 5 minutes. High-resolution data were collected directly from the smartwatch hardware and processed automatically through an integrated software platform. The platform architecture is modular, and different sensors or algorithms could be incorporated. Data quality was quantified for smartwatch data using metrics for raw, valid, and artifact data fractions and for health survey data. Study engagement was generally sufficient to calculate health risk scores, although inconsistent survey inputs limited confirmation of illness in relation to elevated risk scores or of physiological changes in relation to reported illness in many cases.