npj | cardiovascular health Review https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 A guide to consumer-grade wearables in cardiovascular clinical care and population health for non-experts Check for updates Alexandra Jamieson1 , Timothy J. A. Chico2, Siana Jones1, Nishi Chaturvedi1, Alun D. Hughes1 & Michele Orini1,3 Consumer-grade wearables provide an opportunity to understand public health trends, develop risk stratiﬁcation tools and monitor interventions. This review introduces the most common wearable sensors and describes the health parameters that can be measured using them. We highlight research into the validity and accuracy of these measurements and practical considerations for the use of wearable data. Finally, we provide future perspectives on wearables in cardiovascular clinical practice and population health research. Use of consumer-grade wearables has grown considerably in recent years1. These devices, most commonly in the form of smartwatches, wrist-bands or rings, enable users to access personalised healthcare data and physical activity parameters remotely, continuously and in real-time. In the context of healthcare and population researc h, wearable technology provides an opportunity to harness data at scal e, understand public health trends, develop risk stratiﬁcation tools and monitor interventions. Some features of consumer-gra de wearables have regulatory board (e.g. United States Food and Drug Administration; US FDA) approval, however, the majority of b iometric parameters are derived from sensor signals such as photoplethysmography (PPG) and triaxial accelerometery and propri etary algorithms which are not available for public scrutiny. Wear able device software and hardware are regularly improved in the form of software updates and new models with an increasing number of features on offer. The proprietary nature and iterative approach in this market makes product comparison and clinical utility dif ﬁcult to quantify and track in realtime. Furthermore, these devices are engineered and marketed predominantly for individual use and therefore consideration for the practicalities surrounding data a cquisition at scale and analysis pipelines is required. This review aims to provide a nonexpert guide to practitioners in clinical care and population health who are considering the use of consumer-grade wearables in cardiovascular healthcare or research settings, with a focus on the following: 1) a general introduction to wearable sensors; 2) the health parameters that can be measured using these sensors; 3) the validity and accuracy of these measurements; 4) practical considerations for the acquisition and use of wearable data at scale and 5) clinical cardiovascular and population health future perspectives. What sensors are used in wearables? While a growing number of sensors can potentially be embedded into wearables, most of the physiologicaldata in consumer-grade smartwatches and rings is captured by accelerometery, photoplethysmography (PPG) and electrocardiography (ECG) sensors (Fig.1). Photoplethysmography (PPG) PPG is a non-invasive optical technique that uses an infrared light source and a detector at the surface of the skin to measure small variations in blood volume. The intensity of the light transmitted through, or re ﬂected from, skin capillaries is proportional to the blood volume and its light absorption 2.I nr e ﬂectance PPG, the methodology commonly built into wearables, light is shone from a light emitting diode (LED) on to the skin, and the amount of light reﬂected back is measured using a phot odetector positioned close to the emitting LED 3. Wearable technology utilises the PPG signal, whose shape is analogous to an arterial pulse wave but its unitless (Fig. 1), to estimate heart rate (HR) and HR variability (HRV) 4.O t h e r physiological parameters derived from the PPG include respiratory rate5, peripheral oxygen saturation 6 and, more recently, blood pressure (BP) 7,8. Accelerometery Accelerometers are sensors that detect and measure acceleration forces (the rate of change in velocity). Tri-axial accelerometers can detect changes in movement and orientation in three planes (x; medial-lateral, y; cranialcaudal and Z; anterior-po sterior axes) and are widely incorporated into wearables to estimate body position, and several measures of physical activity9. 1Unit for Lifelong Health and Ageing, UCL, London, UK. 2Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease Medical School, University of Shef ﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK. 3Department of Biomedical Engineering, King ’s College London, London, UK. e-mail: alexandra.jamieson@ucl.ac.uk; m.orini@kcl.ac.uk npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 1 1234567890():,; 1234567890():,; Electrocardiography (ECG) The ECG is the gold-standard non-invasive measure of the rhythm of the heart. A standard 12-lead ECG provides a visual representation of the propagation of the electrical impulse through the heart during each cardiac cycle. The variations in the amplitude of the ECG signal over time provide information relating to both HR (e.g., fast ors l o w )a n dr h y t h m( e . g . ,n o r m a lo r abnormal). Traditionally, for clinical purposes this method of cardiac monitoring is performed for 10-seconds at rest or can be performed for 24-hours to several days using portable continuous Holter monitors. With advancements in wearable technology, the recording of short ( ~ 30-second) singlelead ECG recordings is now feasible in the most recent devices. These measurements tend to be taken between opposite arms via two electrodes in close proximity to one another, often a positive electrode on the back of a wristworn wearable and a negative electrode positioned on the digital screen, to create a bipolar ECG signal similar to lead I of the traditional 12-lead ECG10,11. Additional Sensors Wearables are now commonly equipped with many more sensors such as barometers (elevation/altitude), magnetometers (magnetic ﬁelds), global positioning systems (GPS; geolocation) and thermometers (temperature), to provide more comprehensive functionality.