Traditionally, for clinical purposes this method of cardiac monitoring is performed for 10-seconds at rest or can be performed for 24-hours to several days using portable continuous Holter monitors. With advancements in wearable technology, the recording of short ( ~ 30-second) singlelead ECG recordings is now feasible in the most recent devices. These measurements tend to be taken between opposite arms via two electrodes in close proximity to one another, often a positive electrode on the back of a wristworn wearable and a negative electrode positioned on the digital screen, to create a bipolar ECG signal similar to lead I of the traditional 12-lead ECG10,11. Additional Sensors Wearables are now commonly equipped with many more sensors such as barometers (elevation/altitude), magnetometers (magnetic ﬁelds), global positioning systems (GPS; geolocation) and thermometers (temperature), to provide more comprehensive functionality. Electrodermal activity (EDA) Electrodermal activity (EDA) sensors, also known as galvanic skin response s e n s o r su s ee l e c t r o d e so nt h es k i nt om e a s u r es u b t l ev a r i a t i o n si ne l e c t r i c a l conductance. These changes occur as aresult of sweat gland activity and are commonly associated with changes in emotional state. In the context of wearables, EDA sensors are often usedto infer periods of perceived stress12,13. Bioelectrical Impedance (BioZ) Body composition (fat mass, fat free mass, body water content and body fat percentage) can be estimated through the use of bioelectrical impedance analysis (BioZ). BioZ measures the body’s resistance to a low-level electrical current. Traditionally, the integration of this metric with wearable-derived data has been achieved through the use of manufacturer speciﬁc compatible bioimpedance scales which can be synchronised to an individual’sw e a r a b l e health dashboard14. More recently, this technology has been integrated into a consumer-grade smartwatch, enabling individuals to estimate body composition by taking a measurement at rest14. This is done by placing two ﬁngers from the opposite hand to the watch on designated smartwatch button sensors to administer the m icrocurrent required for BioZ assessment15. Due to its association with tissue hydration status, BioZ has also been used in conjunction with the ECG sensor to predict heart failure decompensation16,17 and has been used as part of predictive algorithms in implantable devices18. Gyroscopes Gyroscopes are sensors that measure angular velocity (gyration) and can detect very small angular displacements caused by cardiac activity19.G y r o - scopes are often used in combination with accelerometers in a technique called Gyrocardiography torecord cardiac vibrationsignals in the chest. This technique has been developed to provide insights into the mechanical aspects of the cardiac cycle and detect cardiovascular diseases such as atrialﬁbrillation (AF) and heart failure usingsmartphone applications20. What health parameters can be derived from these sensors and how accurate are they? Table 1 provides details about commonly used smartwatch, wrist-band and ring (Apple, Fitbit, Garmin, Oura, Polar, Samsung, Withings and Whoop) devices and their biometric features. Table2 highlights systematic reviews and meta-analyses that have been performed in each of the biometric parameters described in this section along with the wearable manufacturers that were reviewed in each. This table is detailed but not exhaustive. A living umbrella review of systematic reviews evaluating the accuracy of consumer-grade technologies in health measurement can be found elsewhere21. Resting heart rate (HR) and HR tracking HR is modulated by the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and can be modiﬁed by several physiological and environmental factors. HR changes in response to many physiological and medical stimuli, such as exercise, anxiety, pregnancy, physical ﬁtness, and cardiovascular and noncardiovascular diseases. A chronica lly elevated resting HR is a strong independent risk factor for all-cause mortality and for adverse outcomes in individuals with cardiovascular disease22,23. The accuracy of PPG estimation of HR has been widely documented with validation performed against reference ECG measurements. At rest, wearables are widely considered to measure HR accurately, with mean absolute errors (AE) in the region of 2 beats per minute (bpm), mean absolute percentage errors (MAPE) reported as less than 10% and correlations between the devices and reference methods consistently reported as moderate to excellent24– 32. A systematic review of the reliability and validity of commercially available wearables (Fitbit, Apple Watch, Samsung and Garmin) was Fig. 1 | Consumer-grade wearable sensor signals. A schematic representation of three sensor signals commonly used in consumer-grade wearables: triaxial accelerometery (Accel.), photoplethysmography (PPG) and electrocardiography (ECG). Tri-axial Accel. Signal PPG Signal ECG Signal Time (seconds) Time (seconds) Time (seconds) R P T Q S PR QT Y Z X Systolic peak Diastolic peak Diastolic decaySystolic upstroke Dicrotic notch Cycle duration Steps Pulse Rate Heart Rate https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 2 Table 1 | Biometric features available in commonly used smartwatch, wrist-band and ring (Apple, Fitbit, Garmin, Oura, Polar, Samsung, Withings and W hoop) wearables Apple Fitbit Garmin Oura Polar Samsung Withings Whoop Health metrics Resting HR Every 5 mins Every 1 min Every 15 sec Every 5 mins Every 1 sec Every 5 mins Every 10 mins Every 1 sec HR during activity Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec HR sensor PPG & ECG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG HRV ✓ SDNN ✓ RMSSD ✓ RMSSD SDNN * selected models ✓ RMSSD ✓ RMSSD ✓ SDNN ✓ SDNN * selected models ✓ RMSSD HRV sensor PPG & ECG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG & ECG PPG HRV measurements Sleep & at rest Sleep Sleep & Health Snapshot (informs body battery & overnight recovery data) Sleep Sleep & training Sleep & stress tracking Sleep Sleep (informs baseline recovery, strain, overall readiness score) ECG ✓ * Series 4 & later models ✓ * Sense & Charge 5 ✓ * Venu2+ onwards, Epix Pro (Gen 2), Fenix 7 pro onwards, quatix 7 Pro, tactix 7, D2 Mach 1 Pro, Enduro 3 × ✓ * Grit X2 Pro, Vantage V3 ✓ * Galaxy Watch 3, Galaxy Watch Active 2 & later models ✓ * ScanWatch & Move ECG × ECG recording duration 30 s on demand 30 s on demand 30 s on demand n/a 30 s on demand 30 s on demand 30 s on demand n/a ECG reporting Sinus rhythm Atrial ﬁbrillation Low or high HR ( < 50 or >120 bpm) Inconclusive Poor recording Sinus rhythm Atrial Fibrillation Sinus rhythm Atrial Fibrillation n/a Average HR HRV Beat to beat interval Pulse arrival time Orthostatic test Sinus rhythm Atrial Fibrillation Sinus rhythm Possible Atrial Fibrillation n/a FDA clearance for AF detection ✓ ECG & PPG ✓ ECG & PPG ×× × ✓ ECG ✓ ECG × SpO2 ✓ Blood Oxygen * Series 6 & later models ✓ SpO2 Sensor / Estimated Oxygen Variation * Charge 4 & later models, Sense & Versa series ✓ Pulse Ox (On demand or continuously) ✓ Blood oxygen sensing * Gen 3 ✓ SpO2 * Vantage ✓ Blood oxygen * Galaxy Watch 3, Galaxy Watch Active 2 & later models ✓ Oxygen saturation On demand and sleep tracking ✓ Blood oxygen saturation * 4.0 Respiratory rate ✓ Respiratory rate * Series 4 & later models ✓ Breathing rate * Charge 4 & later models, Sense & Versa series ✓ Respiration rate * Venu, Fenix, Forerunner series ✓ Respiratory rate * Gen 2 & onwards ✓ Respiration rate * Vantage ✓ Respiratory rate * Galaxy Watch 3 & onwards ✓ Breathing disturbances ✓ Respiratory rate * 3.0 onwards Respiratory rate measurements Sleep Sleep, rest & activity Sleep, rest & activity Readiness & sleep scores Nightly recharge Serene guided breathing exercise Sleep analysis Irregular breathing patterns during sleep Continuously Temperature ✓ Wrist temperature * Series 8 & later models ✓ Skin temperature variation * Sense, Versa 3 & Charge 5 ✓ Skin temperature * Venu3 onwards, Epix Pro (Gen 2), Fenix 7 pro onwards, quatix 7 Pro, tactix 7, D2 Mach 1 Pro, Enduro 3 ✓ Body temperature * Gen 3 ✓ Nightly skin temperature ✓ Skin temperature * Galaxy Watch 5 ✓ Body temperature * Scanwatch 2 ✓ Skin temperature * 3.0 onwards Stress / readiness score × ✓ Stress management score / daily readiness score ✓ Stress tracking / body battery ✓ Readiness score / daytime stress / resilience ✓ Nightly recharge ✓ Stress monitoring ✓ Stress level ✓ Stress score / day strain / recovery https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 3 Table 1 (continued) | Biometric features available in commonly used smartwatch, wrist-band and ring (Apple, Fitbit, Garmin, Oura, Polar, Samsung, W ithings and Whoop) wearables Apple Fitbit Garmin Oura Polar Samsung Withings Whoop Stress/ readiness score based on n/a EDA, HRV & sleep HRV, sleep & activity HRV, sleep, recovery metrics HRV & sleep HRV & other biometrics HRV HRV & HR data Blood pressure × Compatible with external BP cuffs ×× × × ✓ * requires periodic calibration with a traditional BP cuff * region dependent * Galaxy Watch 3, Galaxy Watch Active 2 & later models × Compatible with external BP cuffs (Withings BPM Connect) × Body composition × × * From compatible smart scales (Fitbit Aria) × * From compatible smart scales (Garmin Index Scale) ×× ✓ Body fat %, skeletal muscle, basal metabolic rate & body water. * Galaxy Watch 4 & onwards × * From compatible smart scales (Withings Body+ and Body Cardio) × Energy expenditure ✓ Active & total calories ✓ Active & resting calories ✓ Total calories ✓ Calories burned ✓ Total calories burned & calorie tracking for workouts ✓ Calories burned during activities & during the day ✓ Calories burned ✓ Calories burned Women’s health ✓ Digital diary with predictions ✓ Digital diary with predictions ✓ Digital diary with predictions ✓ Digital diary with predictions × ✓ Digital diary with predictions ✓ Digital diary ✓ Digital diary Activity metrics Step count ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓ ✓ Distance ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via activity data Built in GPS ✓ most models ✓ most models ✓ most models × location access can be granted via mobile phone app ✓ most models ✓ most models ✓ most models × location access can be granted via mobile phone app Floors climbed ✓ 3 m (10 feet) ✓ 3 m (10 feet) ✓ 3 m (10 feet) × ✓ * Vantage & Grit series ✓ 3 m (10 feet) ×× Auto. activity recognition ✓✓ SmartTrack ✓ Auto Activity Start × ✓ Automatic Training Detection ✓ Auto Detect Activity ✓ Automatic Workout Detection ✓ CRF ✓ VO2max (Cardio Fitness Level) ✓ Cardio Fitness Score ✓ VO2max ✓ Cardio Capacity ✓ Fitness test for VO2max ✓ VO2max ✓ Cardio Fitness ✓ Strain Score CRF estimate based on HR & activity data from outdoor walking or running HR & activity data HR & activity data from outdoor activities (walking, running, cycling) Anthropometric data & walking test HR during speciﬁc activities During speciﬁc workouts HR & activity data Workout intensity (indirect cardiovascular ﬁtness) CRF units ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min Score Sleep https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 4 performed for the measurement of HR (Table 2)33. A total of 29 studies examined wearable device HR measurements compared with reference measures including ECG, Polar chest straps and pulse oximetry. Of the 177 comparisons, 100 (56.5%) were within ±3% measurement error, 44 (24.9%) were below -3% measurement error and 33 (18.6%) were above 3% measurement error, with a slight tendency to underestimate HR33. However, the accuracy of HR measurement in wearables is known to decline during physical activity. In addition to activity intensity, the activity type and speciﬁcally arm movement during the activity have been shown to inﬂuence the accuracy of HR measurements 34– 36. We recently observed excellent accuracy in measuring HR at rest, and during recovery (MAPE ≤3%), in both Garmin and Fitbit devices, but accuracy worsened during peak exercise37. MAPE was similar to rest and recovery during peak exercise, however, the limits of agreement widened due to an increase in the number of outliers ( ~ 7% for Garmin and ~ 12% for Fitbit) 37.C o n t a c t pressure and sweat have also been shown to impact accuracy38. Heart rate variability (HRV) and pulse rate variability (PRV) HRV is a measure of the variation in thetime interval between each successive heartbeat, speciﬁcally the variation in the duration of consecutive R-R intervals on an ECG. HRV is considered a non-invasive ANS marker representing the balance between the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches39.L o wH R V is associated with cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, arrhythmia and all-cause mortality40 and conversely, optimal HRV is associated with health and resilience41. There are several HRV parameters that can be measured from an ECG which are grouped primarily into time domain and frequency domain markers 42, but more complex markers have been proposed43. Time-domain measurements quantify HRV over a period of time (e.g., 2 min to 24 h) and include the root mean square of successive differences (RMSSD) and the standard deviation ofnormal-to-normal intervals (SDNN). In contrast, frequency domain metrics measure the signal in various bands of frequency and include high frequency power and low frequency power. In the context of wearables, ‘HRV’ measurements may be obtained using an ECG sensor, PPG sensor or both. When measured using PPG, the most appropriate metric to use would be pulse rate variability44,45,w h i c hi s derived from consecutive pulses recorded in the wrist orﬁnger and not from consecutive R-R intervals on an ECG. Despite presentingsome differences related to the pulse arrival time, i.e., the interval between the R-wave in the ECG and the onset of the PPG pulse, HRV from ECG and PPG have been shown to be similar, even in dynamic conditions45. Smartwatches measure the ECG for a short period of time, typically 30 s, from which only measures of ultra-short HRV can be derived22,46. Pulse rate variability has been shown to correlate with HRV during rest and during autonomic challenges 45. According to a recent review, mainly focusing on measurements derived at rest, the correlation between ECG and wearable derived HRV ranged from very good to excellent at rest and declined progressively as exercise intensity increased (Table2)47. In a recent validation study of PPG derived HRV (RMSSD and SDNN) using Garmin’s health snapshot, we observed a strong correlation (between 0.82 and 0.89) between Garmin and reference ECG HRV32. Arrhythmia and AF detection An arrhythmia refers to an abnormality of the heart’sr h y t h mi nw h i c ht h e heart may beat too slowly, too quicklyor irregularly. AF is the most common serious arrhythmia, and refers to a n irregular heart rhythm in which uncoordinated electrical activation in the top chambers of the heart (the atria) can impair cardiac efﬁciency. Although many people with AF are not aware of it, AF can also cause disabling symptoms of an awareness of an unusual heartbeat, breathlessness, dizziness and fatigue. AF affects approximately 59 million individuals worldwide and is associated with an increased risk of blood clots and stroke48. Early detection of AF allows for the prompt implementation of patient m anagement and treatment such as medication, or interventions (such as ablation or cardioversion) as well as risk reduction for the development of AF complications such as stroke and Table 1 (continued) | Biometric features available in commonly used smartwatch, wrist-band and ring (Apple, Fitbit, Garmin, Oura, Polar, Samsung, W ithings and Whoop) wearables Apple Fitbit Garmin Oura Polar Samsung Withings Whoop Time spent asleep ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓ ✓ Sleep stages ✓ REM, Core & Deep ✓ Light, deep & REM ✓ Light, deep & REM ✓ Light, deep & REM ✓ Light, deep & REM ✓ Light, deep & REM ✓ Light, deep & REM ✓ Light, deep & REM Technical speciﬁcations Bluetooth connectivity ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓ ✓ iOS requirements iPhone 6 s or later with iOS 14 or later iOS 14 or later iOS 12 or later iOS 12 or later iOS 12 or later May not support all features with iOS iOS 12 or later iOS 12 or later Android requirements Not compatible Android 8.0 or later Android 6.0 or later Android 8.0 or later Android 6.0 or later Android 6.0 or later Android 6.0 or later Android 6.0 or later Battery life ~3 days ~5 days ~5 days 4 –7 days 5 –14 days 1 –2 days 30 days 4 –5 days HR heart rate, PPG photoplethysmography, ECG electrocardiography, RMSSD root mean square of successive differences, SDNN standard deviation of the normal sinus beat intervals, HRV heart rate variability, FDA Food & Drug administration, AF atrial ﬁbrillation, EDA electrodermal activity, GPS geolocation positioning system, CRF cardiorespiratory ﬁtness, REM rapid eye movement. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 5 Table 2 | Highlighted publications organised by wearable biometric parameter First Author [Reference] Year Title Wearable Manufacturer Health metrics HR Systematic review/ meta-analysis Chan 135 2022 Novel wearable and contactless heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation monitoring devices: a systematic review and meta-analysis.