npj | cardiovascular health Review https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 A guide to consumer-grade wearables in cardiovascular clinical care and population health for non-experts Check for updates Alexandra Jamieson1 , Timothy J. A. Chico2, Siana Jones1, Nishi Chaturvedi1, Alun D. Hughes1 & Michele Orini1,3 Consumer-grade wearables provide an opportunity to understand public health trends, develop risk stratiﬁcation tools and monitor interventions. This review introduces the most common wearable sensors and describes the health parameters that can be measured using them. We highlight research into the validity and accuracy of these measurements and practical considerations for the use of wearable data. Finally, we provide future perspectives on wearables in cardiovascular clinical practice and population health research. Use of consumer-grade wearables has grown considerably in recent years1. These devices, most commonly in the form of smartwatches, wrist-bands or rings, enable users to access personalised healthcare data and physical activity parameters remotely, continuously and in real-time. In the context of healthcare and population researc h, wearable technology provides an opportunity to harness data at scal e, understand public health trends, develop risk stratiﬁcation tools and monitor interventions. Some features of consumer-gra de wearables have regulatory board (e.g. United States Food and Drug Administration; US FDA) approval, however, the majority of b iometric parameters are derived from sensor signals such as photoplethysmography (PPG) and triaxial accelerometery and propri etary algorithms which are not available for public scrutiny. Wear able device software and hardware are regularly improved in the form of software updates and new models with an increasing number of features on offer. The proprietary nature and iterative approach in this market makes product comparison and clinical utility dif ﬁcult to quantify and track in realtime. Furthermore, these devices are engineered and marketed predominantly for individual use and therefore consideration for the practicalities surrounding data a cquisition at scale and analysis pipelines is required. This review aims to provide a nonexpert guide to practitioners in clinical care and population health who are considering the use of consumer-grade wearables in cardiovascular healthcare or research settings, with a focus on the following: 1) a general introduction to wearable sensors; 2) the health parameters that can be measured using these sensors; 3) the validity and accuracy of these measurements; 4) practical considerations for the acquisition and use of wearable data at scale and 5) clinical cardiovascular and population health future perspectives. What sensors are used in wearables? While a growing number of sensors can potentially be embedded into wearables, most of the physiologicaldata in consumer-grade smartwatches and rings is captured by accelerometery, photoplethysmography (PPG) and electrocardiography (ECG) sensors (Fig.1). Photoplethysmography (PPG) PPG is a non-invasive optical technique that uses an infrared light source and a detector at the surface of the skin to measure small variations in blood volume.