Wearables use a combination of PPG sensors and accelerometers to detect changes in HR and movement to calculate total sleep duration and classify sleep stages. In 2023, a validation study was performed to assess the accuracy of 11 commercially available devices including ﬁve wearables (Google Pixel Watch, Galaxy Watch 5, Fitbit Sense 2, Apple Watch 8 and Oura Ring 3) compared to laboratory polyso mnography in 75 participants 109.T h r e e wearables (Google Pixel Watch, Galaxy Watch 5 and Fitbit Sense 2) demonstrated moderate agreement with sleep stage classi ﬁcation (k = 0.4,0.6) and two wearables (Apple Watch 8 and Oura Ring 3) showed fair agreement (k = 0.2,0.4). The authors reported that wearables generally overestimate sleep by misclassifying periods of awake stillness as sleep. The Oura ring showed negligible proportional bias, potentially owing to its use of additional features beyond actigraphy such as body temperature and circadian rhythm for sleep staging110. Fitbit devices were reported to be comparable to polysomnography in accuracy of detecting sleep phases, with 95% to 96% sensitivity and 58% to 69% speciﬁcity in detecting sleep epochs in a 2019 review111. A recent systematic review of eight studies investigated the accuracy of Fitbit, Garmin and Whoop in measuring sleep duration and sleep stages versus polysomnography108. Whoop was reported to have the least disagreement compared to polysomnography for total sleep time (−1.4 min), light sleep (−9.6 min) and deep sleep (−9.3 min) but the largest disagreement for rapid eye movement (REM) sleep (21.0 min). The Fitbit and Garmin devices both showed moderate accuracy in assessing sleep stages and total sleep time compared to polysomnography108. Psychological stress Stress can be de ﬁned as a state of worry or mental tension caused by a challenging situation in life or the environment. Stress activates the sympathetic nervous system resulting in an increase in HR and a decrease in HRV 112. Conversely, during periods of relaxation and sleep, a decrease in HR and increase in HRV can be observed 113.C h r o n i c stress, the repeated occurrence of t he stress response over a period of time, is associated with increased r isk of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus 114,115. The integration of stress management features in wearables is based on HR and HRV analysis and in some, EDA sensors. HRV analysis in weara bles may be accompanied by realtime prompts to perform breathing activities or relaxation techniques in periods of detected stress. Smartwatches were found to more accurately detect periods of psychological stress when utilising HRV and other physiological parameters such as EDA, respiratory rate and temperature instead of HR alone 116. However, concerns surrounding the reliability of EDA measurement due to motion artifact have been raised117. Similarly, the accuracy of stress detection has been noted to decline during periods of vigorous movement, also likely owing to motion artifact116. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 11 Women’s Health The monitoring of fertile windows a nd menstrual cycles have long been utilised for achieving planned pregnancy, preventing unplanned pregnancy, and the identi ﬁcation of irregular or abnormal cycles. Some wearables measure changes in HRV, body temperature and respiratory rate to detect and predict menstrual cycle stages including menstruation, the luteal phase and ovulation118,119. A recent review of 13 studies found that most devices had high accuracy for detecting fertility and were able to differentiate between the luteal phase, fertile window and menstruation by changes in HR, HRV, temperature and respiratory rate (Table2)120. In 2019, a study of the Oura ring reported a sensitivity for ovulation detection of 83.3% (−3t o +2d a y s )a n d menstruation detection of 71.9% to 86.5% (SD 2– 4 days) using nocturnal ﬁnger skin temperature 119. Compared to menstruation, a rise in HR (p = 0.001) and temperature (p < 0.001) during the luteal phases and lower HR ( p = 0.02) and temperature ( p = 0.05) during ovulation has been reported using the Oura ring more recently118. Data acquisition and analysis pipelines When selecting a wearable device for clinical or research purposes, data accessibility is a crucial consideration. Prior to wearable device selection, we would recommend reviewing device speciﬁcations to ensure that the measurement parameters of interest (Table 1) are available (at the sampling frequency required), accessible and exportable in a usable format. Access to raw data varies by manufacturer and model. While some devices display several measurement parameters to users, export options may be limited. No manufacturer currently allows for the export of continuously recorded raw signals (i.e., PPG, 3D accelerometer, temperature etc.), except for the ECG, which can often be exported as a series of 30second long recordings. Most of the data that can be exported for off-line analysis consist in aggregate time-series summarising the trend of a physiological parameter with a temporal resolution that typically goes from one second (e.g., HR) to 15 min (e.g., numb er of steps or respiratory rate for some brands) to 1 day (e.g., sleep duration). Of note, no smartwatch or smart ring currently allows for the export of beat-to-beat HR time-series. Instead, instantaneous HR is usually averaged using undeterminedﬁlters, resulting in relatively smooth trends. Physiological parameters from physical activities recorded by the user (e.g. running, walking, cardio etc.) may include adhoc information (e.g., distance, speed,altitude etc.) with sometimes a better temporal resolution (e.g., HR provided every second instead of every minute), or they may be only exportable as summary statistics (e.g., total number of steps and average HR). As an example, Supplementary Table 1 provides a comprehensive list of parameters that can be exported from a Garmin smartwatch (VivoActive 4), along with their temporal resolution and whether they are passively recorded or may need user ’si n p u t .A d d i - tionally, some manufacturers have introduced premium or subscriptionbased models that may restrict data access. The format of exported raw data ﬁles is another important consideration. Many manufacturers, including Fitbit, Oura and Withings, use standard ﬁle formats such as CSV or TXT, which are relatively easy to process. However, others, including Garmin, use more complex formats such as .FITﬁles for some of their data export, which require more advanced data processing skills to access. To support data retrieval and management, open source platforms such as RADAR-base121, offer infrastructure to facilitate data storage and processing, and third-party services are becoming available122,123. Data security and privacy should beconsidered owing to the sensitive nature of the personalised health inf ormation that these devices collect, particularly when activating GPS tracking systems for location information. To mitigate data security and privacy risks, manufacturer privacy settings and security policies should be reviewed ahead of device selection. Clinical Perspective for Cardiovascular Health Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death worldwide 124.T o reduce the enormous burden of cardi ovascular diseases and disability125, progress is required in prevention, diagnosis, treatment and monitoring, and wearable data may play a useful role in all of these situations. The ability to collect data over months or years allows approaches that are not currently possible, however, may also present challenges in terms of the volume of data collected. Evidence of the value of wearable data comes from the ability to detect abnormal heart rhythms, particularly AF, in people who would otherwise be unaware of this condition (and so at higher risk of stroke and other complications)49,126. Although questions remain about how to manage AF detected by such approaches, the ability to detect such a common and potentially devastating condition shows the potential for improved healthcare. The addition of the ability to record a short ECG with suf ﬁcient accuracy to be approved as a medical device is now replacing more conventional ways to attempt to detect intermittent abnormal heart rhythms (such as issuing patients with such devices or recording the ECG for 72 h hoping to capture an event). Unlike PPG, ECG can only be recorded for s h o r tp e r i o d sa n do f t e nt r i g g e r e db yt h eu s e ra n ds od on o tr e p l a c eo t h e r methods to continually monitor ECG (such as Holter or implanted ECG recorders). Arrhythmia can be diagnosed accurately using a single type of wearable data (ECG or HR characteristics from PPG). In contrast, other important cardiovascular diseases (such as heart failure, valvular heart disease, coronary artery disease, stroke) require specialist tests (such as cardiac ultrasound, coronary angiogram) to make anaccurate diagnosis. However, the data wearables currently collect may still be useful. Heart failure and valvular heart disease are associated with increasing breathlessness on exertion and a reduced ability to be active 127. It is highly likely that patterns of activity, respiratory rate, oximetry, and HR detected by wearables will change as a person develops these diseases and recent studies are encouraging 16,128. Research is urgently required to test this potential, which may allow new approaches to community-based screening or diagnostic programmes. Most patients who are diagnosed with cardiovascular disease typically have very limited interaction with healthcare services except when a crisis occurs (such as cardiac arrest, heart attack or urgent admission with heart failure). Such crises are often preventable if the signs of potential deterioration can be detected early enough for a change in management. Wearables hold great potential for such monitoring. For example, patients discharged after a heart attack are directed to adhere to a structured programme of physical activity129, and wearables have the potential to allow the healthcare system to know if patientsare following such advice and target support to those who need this. People with heart failure suffer frequent worsening that can lead to life-threatening complications that are often preceded by weeks or months of increasing weight, reducing physical activity. These incipient signs of deterioration are likely also to be recognisable in changes in HR, respiratory rate, oximetry and BP. Wearables may therefore allow heart failure services to monitor patients and institute treatment (such as increasing diuretic therapy) to prevent admissions. There remain several barriers to achieving the potential of wearables in healthcare. There is a pressing need for high-quality clinical studies that demonstrate the clinical scenarios in which providing wearable data improves outcomes. Data for its own sake is not helpful unless it can lead to an action that improves the patient ’s health and clinicians already suffer “information overload”. Furthermore, in the health economic context, interventions need to meet a cost-beneﬁt criteria. Although consumer wearables are very attractive for introduction in healthcare due to their low cost and already high ownership levels, regu l a t o r ys a f e g u a r d sm a k et h i sc h a l l e n g i n g .I fd a t af r o mw e a r a b l e si su s e dt o make a clinical decision, then under c urrent regulatory frameworks the wearable requires approval as a medical device. Most devices do not have such approvals and so using them in direct healthcare may pose legal risk. Population Health Perspective The large-scale collection of health data using consumer-grade wearables has the potential to address pressing population health challenges, including https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 12 the obesity epidemic, mental health epidemic, and the growing burden of chronic illnesses and multimorbidi ty. Wearables provide an objective continuous stream of data, offerin g a more comprehensive and possibly more reliable alternative to traditional population health approaches like self-reported questionnaires, which are limited by recall bias and infrequent administration.