Wear able device software and hardware are regularly improved in the form of software updates and new models with an increasing number of features on offer. The proprietary nature and iterative approach in this market makes product comparison and clinical utility dif ﬁcult to quantify and track in realtime. Furthermore, these devices are engineered and marketed predominantly for individual use and therefore consideration for the practicalities surrounding data a cquisition at scale and analysis pipelines is required. This review aims to provide a nonexpert guide to practitioners in clinical care and population health who are considering the use of consumer-grade wearables in cardiovascular healthcare or research settings, with a focus on the following: 1) a general introduction to wearable sensors; 2) the health parameters that can be measured using these sensors; 3) the validity and accuracy of these measurements; 4) practical considerations for the acquisition and use of wearable data at scale and 5) clinical cardiovascular and population health future perspectives. What sensors are used in wearables? While a growing number of sensors can potentially be embedded into wearables, most of the physiologicaldata in consumer-grade smartwatches and rings is captured by accelerometery, photoplethysmography (PPG) and electrocardiography (ECG) sensors (Fig.1). Photoplethysmography (PPG) PPG is a non-invasive optical technique that uses an infrared light source and a detector at the surface of the skin to measure small variations in blood volume. The intensity of the light transmitted through, or re ﬂected from, skin capillaries is proportional to the blood volume and its light absorption 2.I nr e ﬂectance PPG, the methodology commonly built into wearables, light is shone from a light emitting diode (LED) on to the skin, and the amount of light reﬂected back is measured using a phot odetector positioned close to the emitting LED 3. Wearable technology utilises the PPG signal, whose shape is analogous to an arterial pulse wave but its unitless (Fig. 1), to estimate heart rate (HR) and HR variability (HRV) 4.O t h e r physiological parameters derived from the PPG include respiratory rate5, peripheral oxygen saturation 6 and, more recently, blood pressure (BP) 7,8. Accelerometery Accelerometers are sensors that detect and measure acceleration forces (the rate of change in velocity). Tri-axial accelerometers can detect changes in movement and orientation in three planes (x; medial-lateral, y; cranialcaudal and Z; anterior-po sterior axes) and are widely incorporated into wearables to estimate body position, and several measures of physical activity9. 1Unit for Lifelong Health and Ageing, UCL, London, UK. 2Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease Medical School, University of Shef ﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK. 3Department of Biomedical Engineering, King ’s College London, London, UK. e-mail: alexandra.jamieson@ucl.ac.uk; m.orini@kcl.ac.uk npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 1 1234567890():,; 1234567890():,; Electrocardiography (ECG) The ECG is the gold-standard non-invasive measure of the rhythm of the heart. A standard 12-lead ECG provides a visual representation of the propagation of the electrical impulse through the heart during each cardiac cycle. The variations in the amplitude of the ECG signal over time provide information relating to both HR (e.g., fast ors l o w )a n dr h y t h m( e . g . ,n o r m a lo r abnormal). Traditionally, for clinical purposes this method of cardiac monitoring is performed for 10-seconds at rest or can be performed for 24-hours to several days using portable continuous Holter monitors. With advancements in wearable technology, the recording of short ( ~ 30-second) singlelead ECG recordings is now feasible in the most recent devices. These measurements tend to be taken between opposite arms via two electrodes in close proximity to one another, often a positive electrode on the back of a wristworn wearable and a negative electrode positioned on the digital screen, to create a bipolar ECG signal similar to lead I of the traditional 12-lead ECG10,11. Additional Sensors Wearables are now commonly equipped with many more sensors such as barometers (elevation/altitude), magnetometers (magnetic ﬁelds), global positioning systems (GPS; geolocation) and thermometers (temperature), to provide more comprehensive functionality. Electrodermal activity (EDA) Electrodermal activity (EDA) sensors, also known as galvanic skin response s e n s o r su s ee l e c t r o d e so nt h es k i nt om e a s u r es u b t l ev a r i a t i o n si ne l e c t r i c a l conductance. These changes occur as aresult of sweat gland activity and are commonly associated with changes in emotional state. In the context of wearables, EDA sensors are often usedto infer periods of perceived stress12,13. Bioelectrical Impedance (BioZ) Body composition (fat mass, fat free mass, body water content and body fat percentage) can be estimated through the use of bioelectrical impedance analysis (BioZ). BioZ measures the body’s resistance to a low-level electrical current. Traditionally, the integration of this metric with wearable-derived data has been achieved through the use of manufacturer speciﬁc compatible bioimpedance scales which can be synchronised to an individual’sw e a r a b l e health dashboard14. More recently, this technology has been integrated into a consumer-grade smartwatch, enabling individuals to estimate body composition by taking a measurement at rest14. This is done by placing two ﬁngers from the opposite hand to the watch on designated smartwatch button sensors to administer the m icrocurrent required for BioZ assessment15. Due to its association with tissue hydration status, BioZ has also been used in conjunction with the ECG sensor to predict heart failure decompensation16,17 and has been used as part of predictive algorithms in implantable devices18. Gyroscopes Gyroscopes are sensors that measure angular velocity (gyration) and can detect very small angular displacements caused by cardiac activity19.G y r o - scopes are often used in combination with accelerometers in a technique called Gyrocardiography torecord cardiac vibrationsignals in the chest. This technique has been developed to provide insights into the mechanical aspects of the cardiac cycle and detect cardiovascular diseases such as atrialﬁbrillation (AF) and heart failure usingsmartphone applications20. What health parameters can be derived from these sensors and how accurate are they? Table 1 provides details about commonly used smartwatch, wrist-band and ring (Apple, Fitbit, Garmin, Oura, Polar, Samsung, Withings and Whoop) devices and their biometric features. Table2 highlights systematic reviews and meta-analyses that have been performed in each of the biometric parameters described in this section along with the wearable manufacturers that were reviewed in each. This table is detailed but not exhaustive. A living umbrella review of systematic reviews evaluating the accuracy of consumer-grade technologies in health measurement can be found elsewhere21. Resting heart rate (HR) and HR tracking HR is modulated by the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and can be modiﬁed by several physiological and environmental factors. HR changes in response to many physiological and medical stimuli, such as exercise, anxiety, pregnancy, physical ﬁtness, and cardiovascular and noncardiovascular diseases. A chronica lly elevated resting HR is a strong independent risk factor for all-cause mortality and for adverse outcomes in individuals with cardiovascular disease22,23. The accuracy of PPG estimation of HR has been widely documented with validation performed against reference ECG measurements. At rest, wearables are widely considered to measure HR accurately, with mean absolute errors (AE) in the region of 2 beats per minute (bpm), mean absolute percentage errors (MAPE) reported as less than 10% and correlations between the devices and reference methods consistently reported as moderate to excellent24– 32. A systematic review of the reliability and validity of commercially available wearables (Fitbit, Apple Watch, Samsung and Garmin) was Fig. 1 | Consumer-grade wearable sensor signals. A schematic representation of three sensor signals commonly used in consumer-grade wearables: triaxial accelerometery (Accel.), photoplethysmography (PPG) and electrocardiography (ECG). Tri-axial Accel. Signal PPG Signal ECG Signal Time (seconds) Time (seconds) Time (seconds) R P T Q S PR QT Y Z X Systolic peak Diastolic peak Diastolic decaySystolic upstroke Dicrotic notch Cycle duration Steps Pulse Rate Heart Rate https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 2 Table 1 | Biometric features available in commonly used smartwatch, wrist-band and ring (Apple, Fitbit, Garmin, Oura, Polar, Samsung, Withings and W hoop) wearables Apple Fitbit Garmin Oura Polar Samsung Withings Whoop Health metrics Resting HR Every 5 mins Every 1 min Every 15 sec Every 5 mins Every 1 sec Every 5 mins Every 10 mins Every 1 sec HR during activity Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec Every 1 sec HR sensor PPG & ECG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG HRV ✓ SDNN ✓ RMSSD ✓ RMSSD SDNN * selected models ✓ RMSSD ✓ RMSSD ✓ SDNN ✓ SDNN * selected models ✓ RMSSD HRV sensor PPG & ECG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG PPG & ECG PPG HRV measurements Sleep & at rest Sleep Sleep & Health Snapshot (informs body battery & overnight recovery data) Sleep Sleep & training Sleep & stress tracking Sleep Sleep (informs baseline recovery, strain, overall readiness score) ECG ✓ * Series 4 & later models ✓ * Sense & Charge 5 ✓ * Venu2+ onwards, Epix Pro (Gen 2), Fenix 7 pro onwards, quatix 7 Pro, tactix 7, D2 Mach 1 Pro, Enduro 3 × ✓ * Grit X2 Pro, Vantage V3 ✓ * Galaxy Watch 3, Galaxy Watch Active 2 & later models ✓ * ScanWatch & Move ECG × ECG recording duration 30 s on demand 30 s on demand 30 s on demand n/a 30 s on demand 30 s on demand 30 s on demand n/a ECG reporting Sinus rhythm Atrial ﬁbrillation Low or high HR ( < 50 or >120 bpm) Inconclusive Poor recording Sinus rhythm Atrial Fibrillation Sinus rhythm Atrial Fibrillation n/a Average HR HRV Beat to beat interval Pulse arrival time Orthostatic test Sinus rhythm Atrial Fibrillation Sinus rhythm Possible Atrial Fibrillation n/a FDA clearance for AF detection ✓ ECG & PPG ✓ ECG & PPG ×× × ✓ ECG ✓ ECG × SpO2 ✓ Blood Oxygen * Series 6 & later models ✓ SpO2 Sensor / Estimated Oxygen Variation * Charge 4 & later models, Sense & Versa series ✓ Pulse Ox (On demand or continuously) ✓ Blood oxygen sensing * Gen 3 ✓ SpO2 * Vantage ✓ Blood oxygen * Galaxy Watch 3, Galaxy Watch Active 2 & later models ✓ Oxygen saturation On demand and sleep tracking ✓ Blood oxygen saturation * 4.0 Respiratory rate ✓ Respiratory rate * Series 4 & later models ✓ Breathing rate * Charge 4 & later models, Sense & Versa series ✓ Respiration rate * Venu, Fenix, Forerunner series ✓ Respiratory rate * Gen 2 & onwards ✓ Respiration rate * Vantage ✓ Respiratory rate * Galaxy Watch 3 & onwards ✓ Breathing disturbances ✓ Respiratory rate * 3.0 onwards Respiratory rate measurements Sleep Sleep, rest & activity Sleep, rest & activity Readiness & sleep scores Nightly recharge Serene guided breathing exercise Sleep analysis Irregular breathing patterns during sleep Continuously Temperature ✓ Wrist temperature * Series 8 & later models ✓ Skin temperature variation * Sense, Versa 3 & Charge 5 ✓ Skin temperature * Venu3 onwards, Epix Pro (Gen 2), Fenix 7 pro onwards, quatix 7 Pro, tactix 7, D2 Mach 1 Pro, Enduro 3 ✓ Body temperature * Gen 3 ✓ Nightly skin temperature ✓ Skin temperature * Galaxy Watch 5 ✓ Body temperature * Scanwatch 2 ✓ Skin temperature * 3.0 onwards Stress / readiness score × ✓ Stress management score / daily readiness score ✓ Stress tracking / body battery ✓ Readiness score / daytime stress / resilience ✓ Nightly recharge ✓ Stress monitoring ✓ Stress level ✓ Stress score / day strain / recovery https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 3 Table 1 (continued) | Biometric features available in commonly used smartwatch, wrist-band and ring (Apple, Fitbit, Garmin, Oura, Polar, Samsung, W ithings and Whoop) wearables Apple Fitbit Garmin Oura Polar Samsung Withings Whoop Stress/ readiness score based on n/a EDA, HRV & sleep HRV, sleep & activity HRV, sleep, recovery metrics HRV & sleep HRV & other biometrics HRV HRV & HR data Blood pressure × Compatible with external BP cuffs ×× × × ✓ * requires periodic calibration with a traditional BP cuff * region dependent * Galaxy Watch 3, Galaxy Watch Active 2 & later models × Compatible with external BP cuffs (Withings BPM Connect) × Body composition × × * From compatible smart scales (Fitbit Aria) × * From compatible smart scales (Garmin Index Scale) ×× ✓ Body fat %, skeletal muscle, basal metabolic rate & body water. * Galaxy Watch 4 & onwards × * From compatible smart scales (Withings Body+ and Body Cardio) × Energy expenditure ✓ Active & total calories ✓ Active & resting calories ✓ Total calories ✓ Calories burned ✓ Total calories burned & calorie tracking for workouts ✓ Calories burned during activities & during the day ✓ Calories burned ✓ Calories burned Women’s health ✓ Digital diary with predictions ✓ Digital diary with predictions ✓ Digital diary with predictions ✓ Digital diary with predictions × ✓ Digital diary with predictions ✓ Digital diary ✓ Digital diary Activity metrics Step count ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓ ✓ Distance ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via step count & GPS ✓ via activity data Built in GPS ✓ most models ✓ most models ✓ most models × location access can be granted via mobile phone app ✓ most models ✓ most models ✓ most models × location access can be granted via mobile phone app Floors climbed ✓ 3 m (10 feet) ✓ 3 m (10 feet) ✓ 3 m (10 feet) × ✓ * Vantage & Grit series ✓ 3 m (10 feet) ×× Auto. activity recognition ✓✓ SmartTrack ✓ Auto Activity Start × ✓ Automatic Training Detection ✓ Auto Detect Activity ✓ Automatic Workout Detection ✓ CRF ✓ VO2max (Cardio Fitness Level) ✓ Cardio Fitness Score ✓ VO2max ✓ Cardio Capacity ✓ Fitness test for VO2max ✓ VO2max ✓ Cardio Fitness ✓ Strain Score CRF estimate based on HR & activity data from outdoor walking or running HR & activity data HR & activity data from outdoor activities (walking, running, cycling) Anthropometric data & walking test HR during speciﬁc activities During speciﬁc workouts HR & activity data Workout intensity (indirect cardiovascular ﬁtness) CRF units ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min ml/kg/min Score Sleep https://doi.org/10.1038/s44325-025-00082-6 Review npj Cardiovascular Health | (2025) 2:44 4 performed for the measurement of HR (Table 2)33. A total of 29 studies examined wearable device HR measurements compared with reference measures including ECG, Polar chest straps and pulse oximetry. Of the 177 comparisons, 100 (56.5%) were within ±3% measurement error, 44 (24.9%) were below -3% measurement error and 33 (18.6%) were above 3% measurement error, with a slight tendency to underestimate HR33. However, the accuracy of HR measurement in wearables is known to decline during physical activity. In addition to activity intensity, the activity type and speciﬁcally arm movement during the activity have been shown to inﬂuence the accuracy of HR measurements 34– 36.