ReviewCMAJ CMA J• JULY 13, 2010 • 182(10) © 2010 Canadian Medical Association or its licensors 1053 S cientists have predicted that extremes in climate are likely to increase in frequency and severity.1 These changes may have a direct impact on population health, as heat waves can exceed the physiological adaptive capacity of vulnerable population groups. Individuals over the age of 60 years are consistently the most vulnerable,2−4 with 82%–92% of excess mortality occurring in this group.5 Risks for heat-related illness or injuries are compounded for people with obesity,6,7 cardiovascular disease,8− 10 respiratory disease8− 10 and diabetes mellitus.4,8,9 These conditions de - crease the body’s ability to adapt to changes in environmental conditions.11 When people must perform physical work in the heat, the occurrence of heat-related morbidity and mortality is likely to be more frequent.12 Although these trends in heat-related morbidity and mortality are evident, there has been little research to explain the causes of increased susceptibility within vulnerable populations. In this review, we describe the effects of heat on human physiology and the factors that increase the risk of heat stress. The methods used in preparing this review are summarized in Box 1 and are described in greater detail in Appendix 1 (available at www .cmaj .ca /cgi /content /full /cmaj .081050 /DC1). Thermoregulatory responses in healthy people In healthy people, the body regulates its core temperature to maintain a near-constant level (about 37ºC), irrespective of environmental conditions. To do this, the thermoregulatory system adjusts a variety of physiological mechanisms to attain a balance between the heat produced within the body and the heat lost to the environment, through a combination of dry heat exchange and evaporative heat loss. At room temperature, resting metabolic heat production is balanced primarily by dry heat loss through conduction, convection and radiation.13 Heat balance is easily disturbed during exposure to a warmer environment and with changes in metabolic heat production (due to physical activity). As the ambient air temper - ature increases, the capacity for dry heat exchange is reduced because of a reduction in the temperature gradient between the skin surface and the ambient air.13 When the environment is warmer than the skin, the body gains heat through dry heat exchange, which increases the requirements for sweating and circulatory responses to achieve a given rate of heat dissipation. During physical activity, the increase in metabolic rate above resting levels increases the rate at which heat must be dissipated to the environment to prevent the body core temperature from rising to a dangerous level. The extent to which body core temperature increases at steady state is largely independent of the ambient air temperature (within the measured range of 5°C–36°C) and is proportional to the metabolic rate.14 With metabolic or environmental heat load or both, the increase in sweat rate and skin blood flow is proportional to the amount of evaporative heat loss required for heat balance.13 Under circumstances in which changes in sweating and skin blood flow cannot facilitate a sufficiently high rate of heat loss (e.g., intense physical activity in hot or humid conditions, impairment of normal thermoregulatory function), body core temperature rises continuously; left unchecked, this DOI:10.1503/cmaj.081050 Heat stress in older individuals and patients with common chronic diseases Glen P . Kenny PhD, Jane Yardley MSc, Candice Brown BSc, Ronald J. Sigal MD MPH, Ollie Jay PhD From the Human and Environmental Physiology Research Unit (Kenny, Yardley, Brown, Jay), Faculty of Health Sciences, and the Institute of Population Health (Kenny, Yardley), University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ont.; and the Departments of Medicine, Cardiac Sciences and Community Health Sciences, Faculties of Medicine and Kinesiology (Sigal), University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta. Key points • People with age over 60 years, obesity, cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease or long-standing diabetes are at increased risk of heat-related illness during heat waves because of physiological impairments in the regulation of body core temperature in hot conditions. • A homebound lifestyle, lack of contact with other people and decreased mobility can also contribute to an increased risk of heat-related illness. • Working home air conditioners, fans, access to transportation and access to cool environments during prolonged heat events have a protective effect against heat-related illness and deaths. • Physicians should be aware of these risk factors and protective factors against heat illness, and should counsel at-risk patients accordingly. CMAJ 2009. DOI:10.1503/cmaj.081050 Previously published at www.cmaj.ca Review rise in body core temperature may lead to heat illness and eventually death. Exposure to the combination of external heat stress and metabolically generated heat can lead to heat-related disorders. The prevalence of heat stress symptoms increases in direct proportion to the elevation of body core temperature. The major heat-related disorders — heat cramps, heat exhaustion and heatstroke — involve various degrees of thermoregulatory failure, which occurs when a person is exposed to excessive heat or elevations in body core temperature over a prolonged period. Risk factors for heat stress Age Observational studies have shown that people aged 60 years and older are among the worst affected by extreme heat,3−5 with those living in institutions, confined to bed or living alone having the highest rates of illness, injury and death.5,8,15−17In their ecological time-series study, Fouillet and associates2 showed that during the 2003 heat wave in Europe, mortality ratios (ratios of observed deaths to expected deaths) in France increased continuously with age, from 1.3 for people 35–74 years of age to more than 1.7 for those over the age of 75 (Figure 1).