A lower capacity for heat dissipation may be responsible for the greater frequency of heat-related injury and illness in this population.38 An obese person has a smaller ratio of body surface area to body mass for effective sweat evaporation than a leaner person of the same height, because the greater body mass is not proportional to any difference in the size of the interface for heat exchange with the environment. Furthermore, excess body fat is a liability during exposure to hot environments. The specific heat capacity of adipose tissue is less than that of fat-free mass (2.97 kJ·g−1·°C−1 v. 3.64 kJ·g−1·°C−1), which means that a given amount of heat storage per unit body mass will cause a greater increase in average tissue temperature in a person with higher body-fat mass. In addition, the thermal conductivity of fatty tissue is lower than that of other tissues in the body. The convective transfer of heat from the body core to the outer shell (the skin) via the circulation is theoretically independent of body fat, since the peripheral blood vessels are located closer to the surface than the subcutaneous fat layers; however, levels of skin blood flow for given elevations in core temperature have been shown to be lower in people with obesity than in those who are not obese.40 A greater gradient between core and skin temperature develops quickly in a person with obesity, which increases the drive for conductive heat transfer from the body core. However, a thicker subcutaneous layer of adipose tissue restricts this conductive heat transfer and further escalates the risk of heat stress. The extra weight that obese individuals carry also increases the metabolic cost of weight-bearing activities, which elevates the rate of heat production. As shown by Bar-Or and colleagues,6 people with obesity exhibit greater elevation in core temperature than lean individuals for the same absolute workload. This response is independent of ambient temperature and occurs in parallel with elevated sweat rate and greater cardiovascular strain.6 The reflex increase in skin blood flow in response to elevated core temperature may also be impaired in obese individuals.40 Hypertension Hypertension is characterized by elevation of peripheral resistance and is accompanied by a variety of peripheral circulatory changes, including hypertrophy of the vascular smooth muscle41 and vascular rarefaction.42 Each of these changes could lead to impairments in the control of blood flow in the skin43 and consequently weaken core temperature regulation. During exerciseinduced heat stress, people with hypertension experience an elevated blood pressure response and possibly greater thermal strain than people with normotension.44 In earlier studies, Kenney and collaborators44,45found that the increases in forearm blood flow during exercise-induced hyperthermia, which are primarily confined to the skin,46 were markedly reduced in people with hypertension relative to people with normotension. This effect could result in a reduction in heat transfer from the body core to the skin, which would increase the potential for heat illness. Whether exercise performed under hot ambient conditions exacerbates this effect remains unclear. It should be noted that the use of antihypertensive medications (diuretics, vasodilators, β-blockers) may significantly reduce heat tolerance when combined with exercise and warm ambient conditions.47,48 The clinical impact of cardiovascular responses during heat exposure in people with hypertension is unknown. Some studies have suggested that thermoregulatory responses to passive heat exposure may in fact be unaltered in people with hypertension.49,50However, the heat exposure in those studies might not have been of sufficient intensity to capture the results of impaired heat loss responses. Diabetes mellitus Epidemiologic data indicate that individuals with diabetes have significantly higher rates of heat illness and death during heat waves than the general population, with excess in-patient admissions being 30% more numerous (95% confidence interval 4.6%–55.9%, p = 0.033; percentages calculated from raw data in published table) during recorded heat waves9 (Figure 1). Diabetes is associated with several metabolic, cardiovascular and neurologic dysfunctions, which may also play roles in impairing thermoregulatory mechanisms during heat exposure. In both type 1 diabetes51 and type 2 diabetes,51−53 the ability of the blood vessels in the skin to dilate may be impaired, which could decrease the amount of blood being brought to the skin’s surface to dissipate heat. When skin blood flow responses were compared in healthy people and people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes (age-matched, ranging from age 18 to 71 years), vascular reactivity was decreased during 5 minutes of heat exposure among those with diabetes.51 Another study showed that the internal temperature at which vasodilation took place during passive whole-body heat exposure was higher for people with type 2 diabetes than for healthy individuals.53 The delayed onset of skin vasodilation was due to a delay in the active vasodilatory response, not to an increase in vasoconstrictor activity. Poor glucose control and the presence of neuropathy may affect sweating responses in individuals with type 2 diabetes.54,55 Sweating response during passive heating was impaired in people with type 2 diabetes, especially in the distal regions.54 In a separate study, the sweat rate was reduced, especially in the limbs, among people with type 2 diabetes, both at rest and during exercise in the heat.52 The lower sweat rate was thought to be associated with diabetes-related peripheral neuropathy and autonomic dysfunction. Sweating responses to pharmacologic stimuli are maintained in individuals with non-neuropathic diabetes but impaired in those with severe neuropathy.55 We found no studies that directly measured the impact of these impairments on core temperature during physical exposure to heat or exercise. Vascular impairments in type 1 diabetes occur with increasing disease duration and greater degrees of hyperglycemia.56,57 Using postocclusive hyperemia as a means of observing maximal blood flow, 2 groups of researchers found that participants with diabetes and poor glucose control (i.e., average glycated hemoglobin > 7.5%) had poorer blood flow to the limbs than both nondiabetic controls and individuals CMA J• JULY 13, 2010 • 182(10)1056 Review with diabetes who had good glucose control (i.e., average glycated hemoglobin < 7.5%).57,58 Similar results were obtained when local heat applied to the foot was used as a stimulus, the participants with diabetes (average glycated hemoglobin 8.7%) having lower microvascular dilatation and lower resulting skin blood flow than their nondiabetic counterparts.56 Some of these responses may be altered in the presence of high insulin levels.59 Whether these decreases in local skin blood flow affect heat delivery to the skin surface and the resultant core temperature response is unknown. Sweat response can be altered in type 1 diabetes as a result of neuropathy. In a longitudinal study of patients with newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes, the sweat response to a pharmacologic stimulus (acetylcholine) was elevated in the early stages of the disease but decreased with increasing duration of the disease,55,60 which would potentially affect the body’s ability to maintain core temperature. Differing degrees of sweating impairment during whole-body heat exposure (44°C–50°C) have been found in people with type 1 diabetes, the loss of sweating response being related to the presence and severity of neuropathy.54 There is no direct evidence to indicate how these altered sweat responses affect changes in core temperature during exposure to heat in this population. Apart from the major cardiovascular and thermoregulatory responses that take place during acute exercise and heat stress, a number of metabolic alterations associated with diabetes may reduce heat tolerance and affect exercise performance in the heat. Early physiological studies suggested that insulin action in type 1 diabetes may be increased by exposure to high temperatures, increasing the risk of hypoCMA J• JULY 13, 2010 • 182(10) 1057 0.1 1 10 100 10 00 RR or OR (95% CI) Social factor Semenza et al.8 OR 0.4 (0.2–0.6) Access to transportation Semenza et al.8 Semenza et al.8 Kaiser et al.76 Naughton et al.16 Bretin et al.17 Naughton et al.16 O’Neill et al.74 O’Neill et al.74 O’Neill et al.74 O’Neill et al.74 Naughton et al.16 Naughton et al.16 Semenza et al.8 OR 0.71 (0.2–2.3)* OR 0.2 (0.2–0.4) OR 0.2 (0.1–0.7)* RR 1.04 (1.02–1.06) RR 1.09 (1.06–1.12) RR 1.01 (0.99–1.02) RR 1.05 (1.02–1.09) OR 3.1 (1.0–9.7)* OR 0.59 (0.39–0.88) OR 8.1 (1.4–48.1)* OR 7.6 (0.9–355) OR 2.3 (1.4–3.5) OR 0.7 (0.5–0.9) Working fan Air conditioning use Ethnic background Non-white Education ≤ high school Low income Living alone Social contact (group activities) Schwartz et al.19 OR 1.22 (1.09–1.37) > high school White Decreased risk Increased risk OR or RR (95% CI) Figure 2:Relative risks (RRs) or odds ratios (ORs) for various social factors. RRs compare mortality during a heat wave with mortality during comparison dates without heat wave. ORs compare cases who died during a heat wave with controls in the same geographic area who did not die. Values greater than 1.0 indicate a greater risk of heat-related death. *Values were adjusted for neighbourhood and age. CI = confidence interval. Review glycemia.61,62 We found no studies on this topic examining patients treated with newer forms of insulin or newer insulin delivery systems (i.e., insulin pumps). Cardiovascular disease Cardiovascular disease encompasses heart and circulatory ailments, including coronary and valvular heart disease, chronic heart failure, cardiomyopathy, congenital heart defects, and cerebrovascular and peripheral vascular disease.63 Ecological time-series data from the 2003 European heat wave showed that mortality rates among people with cardiovascular disease were 30% greater during the heat wave than during comparison periods18 (Figure 1). Individuals with pre-existing cardiac dysfunction have a reduced ability to increase their cardiac output sufficiently to maintain adequate skin blood flow when core temperature is elevated.64,65 If there is long-term exposure to an extreme heat event, stress on the heart and other organs can be exacerbated by dehydration as body core temperature increases.66 In healthy individuals, even relatively small decrements in hydration status (1% of body weight deficit) can impair the cardiovascular and thermoregulatory re - sponses.67 Although no studies have directly measured the effect of these impairments on core temperature regulation in individuals with cardiovascular disease, increases in blood viscosity (hemoconcentration) due to dehydration can impose a substantial burden on the cardiovascular system.64,66 Heat-related inflammation and coagulation may have contributed to the near doubling of deaths due to cerebral and coronary thrombosis during a London heat wave.66 When healthy individuals were exposed to 6 hours of heat (ambient air temperature 41°C, relative humidity 15%–25%), blood viscosity increased by 24%, red blood cell count increased by 9%, and platelet count rose by 18%. The authors speculated that in people with vascular disease, in whom vasodilation may be impaired and circulation reduced, such changes might explain the observed increase in thromboses. International experts agree that any factor compromising skin blood flow or normal cardiovascular function (such as a reduction in cardiac output) will augment the risk of heat-related injury and increase the need for careful monitoring.37 Unfortunately, very few studies have examined the effects of heat exposure in this population. Those that have been performed have tended to include only participants with relatively mild cardiovascular disease and have therefore likely underestimated the magnitude of the effect in this vulnerable subgroup. Studies of passive heat exposure involving individuals with various cardiovascular impairments have found lower heart rates and lower systolic blood pressure than in healthy controls.68,69 Cutaneous vasodilation and overall skin blood flow were also impaired,70,71 but sweat rate was not affected.69,70 In none of these studies were participants required to discontinue use of medications for their conditions (e.g., acetylsalicylic acid, angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors, lipid-lowering medication), which might have confounded their responses to heat exposure.47,48 Respiratory disease Epidemiologic data indicate that patients with respiratory disease such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lung cancer, influenza, pneumonia, bronchitis, tuberculosis and cystic fibrosis may be vulnerable to heat exposure8,9 (Figure 1). A recent meta-analysis reported that individuals with pulmonary disorders are at a higher risk of death during heat waves (odds ratio 1.61, 95% confidence interval 1.2–2.1).72 There is little evidence to elucidate whether this increase in mortality with heat exposure is due to the changes in air quality that often accompany warmer conditions73 or to physiological failures in thermoregulation as a result of chronic conditions. In our literature search, we found no laboratory studies of thermoregulation in people with pulmonary disorders. Socio-economic considerations Ecological time-series and case–control studies of heatrelated mortality have noted an unequal distribution of morbidity and mortality among various socio-economic groups.2,4,19,74,75A greater risk of mortality due to heat exposure has been associated with lower levels of education,74 lower income,16,75being of nonwhite origin4,19,74and social isolation8,16 (Figure 2). Working home air conditioners,8,16 access to transportation8 and access to cool environments during prolonged heat events (e.g., shopping mall, library)8,16 have a substantial protective effect against heat-related deaths. Epidemiologic studies have suggested that air conditioning is associated with a relative risk reduction for heat-related illness of about 80%, and the presence of a working fan with a relative risk reduction of about 30%.8,16 Housing quality may be a factor affecting the uneven distribution of morbidity and mortality during heat waves.75 Those with lower income are more likely to live in crowded or poor-quality housing, where ventilation is inadequate and air conditioning nonexistent.75 Homeless people can be especially prone to heat injury through lack of shelter from CMA J• JULY 13, 2010 • 182(10)1058 Box 2: Suggestions for health care practitioners* • Watch for the following risk factors for heat-related illness: age > 60 yr, obesity, cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, long-standing diabetes mellitus, hypertension,† decreased mobility, homebound lifestyle, homelessness, severe mental illness, poverty. • Encourage the use of protective measures, including air conditioning, fans, cold showers, transportation to cooler environments and avoidance of strenuous activity in the heat. • Provide education for patients at risk and their caregivers regarding heat illnesses and their prevention. • Incorporate a presummer heat-related medical assessment into routine care plans for people with chronic diseases. • During the session, provide advice about reducing heat exposure, ensuring adequate fluid intake, adjusting medication and other appropriate measures.37 • Inform patients about heat response programs in the community. *For more detailed guidelines, see the World Health Organization publication Heat-health Action Plans,37 available online at www.euro.who.int /globalchange /Topics/20080403_2 †The association with heat-related illness among patients with hypertension may be due to their antihypertensive medications. Review extreme heat or because of underlying chronic physical and psychiatric diseases.4,8,9,72 Future research Studies of thermoregulatory function in vulnerable populations have generally been limited to mild heat exposure or have involved low-risk patients. Very few studies have examined physical exertion in the heat involving people with obesity or chronic diseases. There is no information on whether combinations of various factors (e.g., older age and a chronic disease) compound the risk of heat-related morbidity and mortality. It will be essential to discern whether impairment in thermoregulatory capacity exists in terms of the wholebody response and not simply in terms of local heat-loss responses (sweating or skin blood flow or both). New research should focus not only on filling these gaps in the science-based information but also on developing clinical guidelines for health professionals, to facilitate the giving of advice to patients. Conclusion People with age over 60 years, obesity, hypertension, pulmonary or cardiovascular disease, or long-standing diabetes are at increased risk of heat-related illness — heat cramps, heat exhaustion and heatstroke — during prolonged heat events. Other contributing factors include homebound life - style, lack of contact with other people and decreased mobility. This increased vulnerability is related to physiologic al impairments in the regulation of body core temperature in hot conditions. Physicians should be aware of these risk factors and of protective factors against heat illness, such as fans, air conditioners and access to cool environments, and should counsel at-risk patients accordingly (Box 2). This article has been peer reviewed. Competing interests:None declared. Contributors:Jane Yardley, Glen Kenny and Candice Brown were responsible for selecting the search terms, performing the database searches and assessing study quality. All of the authors were involved in the drafting and revision of the article and approved the final version submitted for publication. Acknowledgements: This research was supported by Health Canada, Climate Change and Health Office. Jane Yardley was supported by a Canadian Diabetes Association Doctoral Research Award and funds from the Ottawa Health Research Institute Research Chair in Lifestyle Research. Glen Kenny was supported by a University of Ottawa Research Chair Award. Ronald Sigal is supported by a Senior Health Scholar award from the Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research