ReviewCMAJ CMA J• JULY 13, 2010 • 182(10) © 2010 Canadian Medical Association or its licensors 1053 S cientists have predicted that extremes in climate are likely to increase in frequency and severity.1 These changes may have a direct impact on population health, as heat waves can exceed the physiological adaptive capacity of vulnerable population groups. Individuals over the age of 60 years are consistently the most vulnerable,2−4 with 82%–92% of excess mortality occurring in this group.5 Risks for heat-related illness or injuries are compounded for people with obesity,6,7 cardiovascular disease,8− 10 respiratory disease8− 10 and diabetes mellitus.4,8,9 These conditions de - crease the body’s ability to adapt to changes in environmental conditions.11 When people must perform physical work in the heat, the occurrence of heat-related morbidity and mortality is likely to be more frequent.12 Although these trends in heat-related morbidity and mortality are evident, there has been little research to explain the causes of increased susceptibility within vulnerable populations. In this review, we describe the effects of heat on human physiology and the factors that increase the risk of heat stress. The methods used in preparing this review are summarized in Box 1 and are described in greater detail in Appendix 1 (available at www .cmaj .ca /cgi /content /full /cmaj .081050 /DC1). Thermoregulatory responses in healthy people In healthy people, the body regulates its core temperature to maintain a near-constant level (about 37ºC), irrespective of environmental conditions. To do this, the thermoregulatory system adjusts a variety of physiological mechanisms to attain a balance between the heat produced within the body and the heat lost to the environment, through a combination of dry heat exchange and evaporative heat loss. At room temperature, resting metabolic heat production is balanced primarily by dry heat loss through conduction, convection and radiation.13 Heat balance is easily disturbed during exposure to a warmer environment and with changes in metabolic heat production (due to physical activity). As the ambient air temper - ature increases, the capacity for dry heat exchange is reduced because of a reduction in the temperature gradient between the skin surface and the ambient air.13 When the environment is warmer than the skin, the body gains heat through dry heat exchange, which increases the requirements for sweating and circulatory responses to achieve a given rate of heat dissipation. During physical activity, the increase in metabolic rate above resting levels increases the rate at which heat must be dissipated to the environment to prevent the body core temperature from rising to a dangerous level. The extent to which body core temperature increases at steady state is largely independent of the ambient air temperature (within the measured range of 5°C–36°C) and is proportional to the metabolic rate.14 With metabolic or environmental heat load or both, the increase in sweat rate and skin blood flow is proportional to the amount of evaporative heat loss required for heat balance.13 Under circumstances in which changes in sweating and skin blood flow cannot facilitate a sufficiently high rate of heat loss (e.g., intense physical activity in hot or humid conditions, impairment of normal thermoregulatory function), body core temperature rises continuously; left unchecked, this DOI:10.1503/cmaj.081050 Heat stress in older individuals and patients with common chronic diseases Glen P . Kenny PhD, Jane Yardley MSc, Candice Brown BSc, Ronald J. Sigal MD MPH, Ollie Jay PhD From the Human and Environmental Physiology Research Unit (Kenny, Yardley, Brown, Jay), Faculty of Health Sciences, and the Institute of Population Health (Kenny, Yardley), University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ont.; and the Departments of Medicine, Cardiac Sciences and Community Health Sciences, Faculties of Medicine and Kinesiology (Sigal), University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta. Key points • People with age over 60 years, obesity, cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease or long-standing diabetes are at increased risk of heat-related illness during heat waves because of physiological impairments in the regulation of body core temperature in hot conditions. • A homebound lifestyle, lack of contact with other people and decreased mobility can also contribute to an increased risk of heat-related illness. • Working home air conditioners, fans, access to transportation and access to cool environments during prolonged heat events have a protective effect against heat-related illness and deaths. • Physicians should be aware of these risk factors and protective factors against heat illness, and should counsel at-risk patients accordingly. CMAJ 2009. DOI:10.1503/cmaj.081050 Previously published at www.cmaj.ca Review rise in body core temperature may lead to heat illness and eventually death. Exposure to the combination of external heat stress and metabolically generated heat can lead to heat-related disorders. The prevalence of heat stress symptoms increases in direct proportion to the elevation of body core temperature. The major heat-related disorders — heat cramps, heat exhaustion and heatstroke — involve various degrees of thermoregulatory failure, which occurs when a person is exposed to excessive heat or elevations in body core temperature over a prolonged period. Risk factors for heat stress Age Observational studies have shown that people aged 60 years and older are among the worst affected by extreme heat,3−5 with those living in institutions, confined to bed or living alone having the highest rates of illness, injury and death.5,8,15−17In their ecological time-series study, Fouillet and associates2 showed that during the 2003 heat wave in Europe, mortality ratios (ratios of observed deaths to expected deaths) in France increased continuously with age, from 1.3 for people 35–74 years of age to more than 1.7 for those over the age of 75 (Figure 1). Although the greater prevalence of comorbidities and medication use in this population may be responsible for some of the heat-related deaths, laboratory-based physiological studies have indicated that the ability to sense heat20 and to manifest appropriate behavioural (especially fluid intake)21−26 and physiological (e.g., blood distribution, sweating) responses27−33 during exposure to heat may be compromised in otherwise healthy older individuals. The ability to physiologically maintain body core temper - ature during heat stress becomes compromised with age.27 This decrease in thermoregulatory ability can be attributed to a combination of factors, including changes in sweating,28−30,34 blood flow to the skin30,31,34,35and cardiovascular function.32 The problem can be exacerbated by the decreases in overall physical fitness and increases in body adiposity that may accompany aging.36 Experts have suggested that, in combin - ation, these age-related changes in thermoregulatory and cardiovascular function can decrease the body’s ability to maintain body core temperature at safe levels, especially during extended exposure to heat or to physical activity in the heat.37 The results of a recent physiological study20 suggested that older people are less sensitive to heat exposure and take longer to respond to temperature changes than their younger counterparts. The age-related decrease in sweat rate does not appear to be due to a decrease in the number of activated sweat glands,28,29 but rather to a reduction in the amount of sweat produced per gland, as shown by studies in which the sweat glands were stimulated pharmacologically.28,29,33 Older individuals also experience reductions in evaporative heat loss and overall sweat rate during physical activity.27 Laboratory-based physiology studies have shown that the reduced sweat output is accompanied by a decrease in skin blood flow during exposure to heat.30,31,34 Although the researchers observed no age-related differences in the onset of skin vasodilation, reflex increases in skin blood flow in response to increasing core temperature were attenuated in aged skin during passive heat exposure, independent of the level of acclimation.30 Age-related decreases in skin blood flow during passive heat exposure were associated with reduced cardiac output (despite a similar heart rate re - sponse) and less redistribution of blood flow from renal and splanchnic circulations.32 Similar age-related reductions in skin blood flow have been observed during exercise in the heat.31 Older adults may also have a decreased ability to sense and adapt to dehydration. In physiology studies in which dehydration was induced through heat exposure alone,24 through physical activity in the heat25,26 or through hypertonic saline infusion,23 healthy older individuals exhibited lower subjective levels of thirst, decreased plasma volume and reduced water intake while dehydrated relative to younger counterparts. Recovery from dehydration is prolonged in older adults, which may exacerbate their risk of heat-related injuries during extended periods of heat exposure, such as heat waves.21 In spite of the apparent thermoregulatory impairments, there is evidence showing that older adults are capable of adapting.30,33Both passive heat exposure and mild to moderate exercise in a very hot environment (i.e., above 40°C) over an 8to 10-day period resulted in adaptation in older people.30,33 Physiological changes included lower skin and rectal temperatures, increased output of sweat, decreased concentration of sodium in the sweat and a reduced temperature threshold for the onset of vasodilation and sweating.30,33Despite these adaptations, the responses to heat were attenuated after repeated exposure to heat, relative to younger participants undergoing the same acclimation protocol.30,33 Whereas physical activity in the heat led to increased thirst, augmented fluid intake and CMA J• JULY 13, 2010 • 182(10)1054 Box 1: Review methods We searched the following databases for the period January 1924 to February 2009: Ovid Medline, AARP Ageline, AccessScience, Annual Reviews, Cochrane Library, Clinical Evidence, Proquest Dissertations & Theses Database, EMBASE, HealthSTAR, MEDLINE, Scopus, PASCAL and Scholars Portal. We also used the National Research Council of Canada’s National Science Library Catalogue and the Statistics Canada “Health in Canada” website to collect information. We used the following key words for the search: diabetes, type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, NIDDM, IDDM, heat illness, heat stroke, dehydration, thirst, heat exposure, mortality, morbidity, prevalence, thermoregulation, age, elderly, obesity, fatness, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, lung disease, COPD, high blood pressure, fitness, vulnerable, body heat storage, body temperature, core temperature, socioeconomic status, income, heat wave, education. All searches were limited to humans. We found no randomized trials evaluating interventions to reduce the risk of heat injury in vulnerable populations. We retained the following types of studies: laboratory-based physiology studies of thermoregulatory function, along with epidemiologic studies, case–control studies and ecological time-series studies showing the vulnerability of specific groups. We excluded case studies. Review greater plasma volume in young individuals, these adaptations may be attenuated in older individuals.21,22 Obesity Fatal heatstroke occurs 3.5 times more frequently in adults with overweight and obesity than in individuals of average body weight.38 Whether this is due to impairments in thermoregulation remains essentially unknown, as very few studies have examined heat exposure in obese individuals. Nonetheless, some evidence indicates that both heat-sensing and heatdissipating abilities may be impaired in this population. Obese individuals may have lower thermal sensitivity to heat stimuli.39 The mechanism for this is thought to be related to underlying small-fibre neuropathies, which may in fact be CMA J• JULY 13, 2010 • 182(10) 1055 Characteristic Hoffmann et al.18 Schwarz et al.19 Lorente et al.15 Bretin et al.17 Naughton et al.16 Bretin et al.17 Lorente et al.15 Semenza et al.8 Semenza et al.9 Hoffmann et al.18 Semenza et al.9 Semenza et al.8 Semenza et al.9 Semenza et al.9 Schwarz et al.19 Lorente et al.15 Lorente et al.15 Semenza et al.9 Lorente et al.15 Fouillet et al.2 Fouillet et al.2 Fouillet et al.2 Respiratory diseases Cardiovascular disease Type 2 Type 1 Diabetes Hypertension Obesity ≥ 75 35–74 < 35 RR 1.3 (1.3–1.4) RR 1.7 (1.6–1.8) OR 1.2 (0.7–2.2)† RR 1.24 (1.19–1.29) OR 1.2 (0.8–1.7)† OR 1.3 (0.8–2.3)† OR 1.17 (1.04–1.32) RR 1.22 (1.08–1.36) RR 1.33 (1.21–1.45) OR 2.3 (1.5–3.6) RR 1.23 (1.18–1.28) OR 7.17 (2.5–20.8)‡ OR 3.19 (2.08–4.90) OR 1.1 (0.8–1.6)† RR 1.30* OR 2.2 (1.0–4.9) RR 1.13 (0.99–1.26) OR 1.48 (0.96–2.26) OR 1.6 (1.0–2.5)† OR 1.13 (1.00–1.26) RR 1.61* 0.1 1 10 100 RR 1.1 (1.0–1.2) Decreased risk Increased risk RR or OR (95% CI) Type not specified Age, yr OR or RR (95% CI) Figure 1:Relative risks (RRs) or odds ratios (ORs) for age and various health conditions. RRs compare hospital admission9 or mortality2,18 during a heat wave with mortality (or hospital admission) observed during comparison dates without heat wave. ORs compare cases who died during a heat wave with controls in the same geographic area who did not die. Values greater than 1.0 indicate a greater risk of heat-related death or hospital admission. *95% confidence intervals (CIs) were not provided in this study. †Values were adjusted for sex and autonomy (ability to get out of bed, wash and use bathroom without help). ‡Values were adjusted for neighbourhood and age. Review common in people with obesity, even in the absence of clinical sensory impairment.39 It is unclear, however, if a reduction in thermal sensitivity is associated with a reduction in heat loss effector responses. A lower capacity for heat dissipation may be responsible for the greater frequency of heat-related injury and illness in this population.38 An obese person has a smaller ratio of body surface area to body mass for effective sweat evaporation than a leaner person of the same height, because the greater body mass is not proportional to any difference in the size of the interface for heat exchange with the environment. Furthermore, excess body fat is a liability during exposure to hot environments. The specific heat capacity of adipose tissue is less than that of fat-free mass (2.97 kJ·g−1·°C−1 v.