DW, which reported an RMSE of 1.97 ◦C or nearly ﬁve times the next-highest reported RMSE, likely due to its reliance on a single, distal measurement site, single sensor, and proprietary algorithm. This outlier was the only algorithm reporting an RMSE above 0.5 ◦C. These critical ﬁndings demonstrate that accurate CBT predictions using wearable devices is achievable under controlled, prescribed conditions, but algorithms must be validated in a wide range of conditions and subjects. Increasing the number of wearable devices worn did not appear to correlate with the increased accuracy in this review (RMSE 0.29 ± 0.15 ◦C in 233 subjects for single-device algorithms versus 0.29 ± 0.12 ◦C in 354 subjects for multiple-device algorithms; Table 4), showing that sufﬁcient data can be collected for CBT prediction from a single wearable device. High accuracy across variable conditions and subjects was observed in the two algorithms in this review that reported the use of ML methods [31,57]. The ﬁrst algorithm included ambient humidity and temperature sensors with skin temperature and heart rate in a single wearable device, the KENZEN, along with user-input individual characteristics, including age, mass in kilograms, and biological sex [31]. This algorithm showed a high degree of accuracy across variable conditions and exertion levels ranging from 13.4 to 43.2 ◦C and 32 to 110% predicted max HR (RMSE = 0.30 ◦C) when tested on 27 subjects [57]. The study used LOOCV to evaluate and compare the accuracy of multiple ML algorithms. The other algorithm using ML methods in this review used a proprietary ML method with the CORE device to predict CBT from the HR, skin temperature, and heat ﬂux in consistent environmental conditions. This study reported the lowest MD and thus highest accuracy Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 11 of 16 of the algorithms reporting that measure but could not be compared against the algorithms reporting the RMSE. In addition, this study did not validate the algorithm in varying environmental conditions or include environmental variables in the algorithm [57]. It also must be noted that, as a proprietary device and algorithm, the exact methods being used are unknown; thus, transparency in methods, development, accuracy, and reliability is critical to using such devices for clinical decision-making. While these studies showed immense promise for the use of ML methods to predict CBT due to the high accuracy observed, accurate predictions in controlled clinical and laboratory settings and in similar subjects may not translate to the variable conditions of a dynamic external environment [ 30,36]. Thus, the clinical validation of these algorithms in variable environments and larger, more diverse subject pools is still required. The above studies using ML methods reﬂected similar limitations to others in this review, namely the lack of validity in dynamic real-world environments and lack of diverse subject pools. Even though 21 out of 25 total algorithms in this review conducted validations in at least two different environmental conditions (ambient humidity and temperature), many of these validations were in laboratory settings rather than in the ﬁeld. Additionally, all but eight algorithms limited their validation testing to one clothing level [31,34,37,63], and the clothing level was included as a variable in only one algorithm [37]. Environmental conditions were included as variables in only three CBT prediction algorithms reporting the RMSE [31,37,46], including the above-mentioned algorithm using the KENZEN device, and these three algorithms reported a much more accurate average RMSE than algorithms not including environmental variables (0.18 ◦C across 105 subjects compared to 0.42 ◦C across 558 subjects). Additionally, the rates of heat accumulation and dissipation and, in turn, individual CBT have shown to be affected by individual variables, including gender, age, level of physical ﬁtness, skin surface to body mass ratio, hydration status, sleep deprivation, and phase of the menstrual cycle [ 36]. Studies have also shown that the chances of HRI are increased by up to 40% in those with previous episodes of HRI; skin conditions increasing heat storage; cardiac or thyroid conditions preventing proper thermoregulation; those experiencing alcohol or opioid withdrawal; and those taking medications that affect the body’s ability to thermoregulate, including anticholinergics, antipsychotics, antihistamines, and stimulants [ 9,10,28,35]. However, the subject pools in the reported studies did not show much variability, with the average subject age and mass ranging from 21.6 to 31.1 years and 72.1 to 81.0 kg, only a third of the reviewed algorithms including female subjects in addition to male and most studies standardizing the results by excluding participants with medical conditions or taking medication. Only one algorithm included subject characteristics or demographics as variables [31]. While the reported results were accurate within their constrained conditions and populations, future algorithms must be validated across varied environments and populations at high risk for HRI, including athletes, soldiers, ﬁrst responders, and those working physically intensive occupations. Ideally, algorithms will also be validated across both normal and pathologic CBTs, although subject safety dictates stopping exercise once reaching 40 ◦C due to the high risk of harm at this temperature. There remains a need to validate algorithms for high school athletes under 19 years of age, as this demographic makes up the largest proportion (nearly 50%) of HRI presenting to emergency rooms [68]. ML methods offer vast opportunities to address some of the current issues with CBT prediction with the wearable devices described in this review, namely the individualization of predictions, wearable device count, and interoperability with the existing HRI prevention tools. This systematic review demonstrated the ability of the current algorithms to predict CBT using wearable devices accurately under controlled conditions, as well as in varied conditions when including environmental variables such as in the algorithms in Moyen et al., Welles et al. and Nazarian et al. [ 29,31,46]. While the accuracy from the study is not in question, future studies should strive to validate CBT prediction algorithms using wearable devices in dynamic, real-world environments, such as in Moyen et al. and in a wider variety of subjects at risk for HRI. Rather than limiting the scope of validation Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 12 of 16 conditions, future algorithms using ML methods may be able to personalize their results by including additional data and variables on individual subjects into future algorithms, thereby better controlling for the inherent variability between users. Additionally, ML methods such as causal modeling and dimensionality reduction, used to determine the correlations between variables, can help reduce the number of devices worn and eliminate redundant data sources, as demonstrated in the study by Eggenberger et al., which showed the ability to acquire highly similar correlations between two CBT prediction algorithms using either 18 unique measurement locations or by reducing their algorithms to include only 2 of those measurements (r2 = 0.70 versus r2 = 0.68, respectively) [60]. Most importantly, the interoperability and integration between wearable CBT prediction algorithms and preexisting tools for injury prevention will decrease the athletic trainer burden and provide a wholistic platform for expedited clinical decision-making during times of distress (Figure 5). Existing systems such as EMRs, heat indices such as the wet bulb globe temperature (WBGT), and the integration of CBT prediction algorithms into a holistic platform will provide team physicians, athletic trainers, head coaches, sports scientists, employers, and military ofﬁcers an integrative platform to ultimately reduce the incidences of HRI and injury burden more broadly while optimizing performances. The algorithm could also integrate with the existing tools used in HRI prevention for athletes and employees, such as the WBGT, which estimates environmental heat stress by accounting for environmental variables, including the air temperature, humidity, wind speed, and thermal radiation [69], to estimate the effects of external inﬂuences on a subject’s heat status. This integrated system could also help prevent the underor overuse of injuries and maximize performances by identifying problematic patterns and informing coaches, trainers, and ofﬁcers on decisions to stop or alter exercises and keep athletes within an optimal temperature range to prevent HRI and maximize performances [47]. The future of interoperability between wearable CBT prediction algorithms using ML and the preexisting tools for injury prevention such as EMRs, heat indices, AMSs and worker management systems, and treatment algorithms will increase the availability and speed of access of important data for decision-making, thus preventing injuries and improving care at the clinic, athletic ﬁeld, and battleﬁeld. Figure 5. A workﬂow schematic depicting the hypothetical interoperability of an algorithm for CBT prediction using wearable devices [25–27,54]. Both sensor inputs to the CBT prediction algorithm and its output to other systems are included in the schematic. Heart Rate is used to calculate both the CBT and internal workload. EMR = Electronic Medical Record, RPE = Rating of Perceived Exertion, and SmO2 = Muscle Oxygen Saturation. Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 13 of 16 5. Conclusions This systematic review focused on the current state of wearable sensor technology and predictive analytics towards monitoring the core body temperature in athletes, with applications in other ﬁelds of work in high acuity environments or situations (Figure 6). The ﬁndings of this review demonstrate the opportunity that exists for the development of accurate and versatile wearable sensors that integrate CBT monitoring algorithms to accurately predict the onset of and prevent heat-related illness. The overall volume of currently published literature on the application of wearable technology to monitor the core body temperature is limited, with only 20 studies and 25 CBT prediction algorithms for exercising subjects identiﬁed in this systematic review. Of the algorithms reporting a RMSE, 17 out of 18 algorithms reported here met the previously identiﬁed clinical validity standards, with an RMSE lower than 0.5 ◦C. The validation of these algorithms in variable populations and in real-world situations is still needed. A large opportunity exists for ML methods to incorporate individual and environmental characteristics, such as ambient temperature and subject demographics, into CBT prediction algorithms. Improved CBT prediction methods using ML will more reliably predict and prevent HRI across diverse environments and populations, but the future of CBT prediction lies in its integration with the larger HRI and athletic injury prevention space, which includes heat indices such as the WBGT, athlete management systems, electronic medical records, treatment algorithms, and RTP protocols. ML algorithms, with their increased data processing abilities, are ideal candidates for interoperability within these larger systems, as they can both supply input to the CBT prediction algorithm and use its output, along with other data, to assist in clinical decision-making, increasing the amount of data available to clinicians and streamlining transitions of care. Figure 6. Conclusions from this review and proposed future directions for the technology. HRI = heat-related illness, CBT = core body temperature, RMSE = root mean square error, WBGT = wet bulb globe temperature, AMS = athlete management system, and EMR = electronic medical record. Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 14 of 16 Author Contributions: C.M.D., E.R.H. and D.R.S. contributed to the design, collection, analysis, interpretation of data, writing, and editing of the manuscript. All the other authors contributed heavily to the editing and review of the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research received no external funding. Institutional Review Board Statement: This systematic review did not require IRB review as it relied entirely on publicly available data and therefore did not meet the deﬁnition of human subjects as in 45 CFR 46.102. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: The authors conﬁrm that the data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are available within the article. Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge a collaboration between Case Western Reserve University and University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center. Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.