Method Commercial Devices in Use for Exercising CBT Measurement Advantages Disadvantages Gastrointestinal • HQ, Inc. CorTemp [42] • Accurate measurement of internal CBT • Results are easily obtained even in athletic environment • Requires repeated ingestion • High cost and requires receiver device • Injured athletes who need an MRI and have ingested device cannot be imaged Rectal • Henry Schein DataTherm II [43] • YSI Temperature Sensor [43] • WelchAllyn SureTemp Plus [43] • Accurate measurement of internal CBT • Standard of Care • Cost-efﬁcient • Uncomfortable/painful • Not robust enough for athletic use Esophageal • Medtronic Mon-A-Therm [44] • Circa S-Cath Temperature Probe [45] • Accurate measurement of internal CBT • Highly sensitive to small changes in CBT—readings constantly changing • Uncomfortable/unreasonable in athletic settings Oral • None • Results are easily obtained • Standard of Care and readily available • Cost-efﬁcient • Not an accurate measurement of CBT • Not capable of continuous monitoring Temporal • None • Quick temperature readings • Capable of continuous monitoring • Inaccurate readings • Requires sensors placed on face • Could inhibit athletic protective equipment (e.g., helmets) Wearable Sensors (e.g., wrist monitors) • Nazarian et al. [46] • Tsadok et al. CW [47] • Tsadok et al. DW [47] • Built for athletic use without impeding athlete movement • Capable of continuous monitoring • Not as accurate as rectal monitoring • Efﬁcacy has yet to be validated during athletic activities Epidermal Sensors • Moyen et al. [31] • greenTEG CORE [48] • Equivital EQ02 [49] • Zephyr BioHarness [50] • Potential for extremely comfortable athletic use • Integration into textiles worn by athletes • Efﬁcacy has yet to be validated during athletic activities • Not as accurate as rectal monitoring The body of literature investigating CBT prediction systems is now growing, and algorithms are becoming more complex. Few of these scientiﬁcally evaluated algorithms using wearable devices are being used in practice to reduce the burden of HRI in at-risk populations. Yet, the number of wearable devices that report CBT measurements are increasing on the market. This systematic review provides a comprehensive understanding of how the prediction of CBT using wearable technology has been studied and the accuracy, reliability, and conditions in which CBT predictions have been validated in the literature (e.g., subject characteristics, exercise conditions, study methodology, and generalizability to larger populations). The results disseminating from this review will highlight how CBT is currently being calculated to better understand the gap in translational compatibility of this research into practical systems to prevent HRI and optimize performances in high-risk populations. 2. Materials and Methods A systematic literature search was conducted in the Web of Science Core Collection database to identify works from 1 January 2000 until 31 December 2021 in which predicted CBT was compared to measured CBT in exercising subjects. This database was selected for its inclusion in both medical and engineering journals. The search used the terms below, where TS stands for topic and searches the title, abstract, author keywords, and Web of Science Keywords Plus for the speciﬁed term or terms. TS = (core body temperature OR core temperature OR deep body temperature) AND TS = (noninvasive OR non-invasive OR wearable OR indirect) AND TS = (exercise* OR hot* OR heat* OR physical*) AND TS = (model* OR predict* or estimate*) Studies were excluded if they met any of the following criteria: 1. non-medical or non-human research; Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 5 of 16 2. systematic and narrative reviews or meta-analyses that did not develop a previously unreported CBT prediction algorithm; 3. did not include a wearable device (deﬁned below); 4. did not include exercising subjects; 5. validated the CBT prediction model with the same data on which it was developed; 6. did not use a sufﬁcient comparator method (ingestible telemetric temperature pills, rectal thermometer, or esophageal thermometer); 7. did not predict or measure CBT. The study selection process and enumeration of CBT prediction algorithms are depicted in Figure 3. Figure 3. Flowchart depicting the search results and methodology of the study selection. Additionally depicted is the enumeration of multiple prediction models from some studies. For this review, wearables were deﬁned as epidermal patches, wrist monitors, and chest straps [54]. Sufﬁcient comparators were deﬁned as ingestible telemetric temperature pills, rectal thermometers, or esophageal thermometers in accordance with the previous literature demonstrating the effectiveness of these methods in measuring the core body temperature [30]. The following data were extracted from papers meeting the inclusion andexclusion criteria: 1. Study metrics and methodology , including participant demographics andtesting conditions; 2. Characteristics of the CBT predictive algorithm, including modeling method and number and locations of sensors; 3. Outcome measures of algorithm prediction accuracy, deﬁned as the root mean square error (RMSE), mean difference (MD), or standard error of the estimate (SEE). Studies were also classiﬁed as whether they collected prospective data or retrospective data. The testing conditions were recorded based on the variability of the exercise environment and the exercises performed. Studies in which the testing environment was considered variable included a difference of at least 2.0 ◦C and/or 10% relative humidity within a testing period or between separate testing periods. Studies in which the exercise intensity or pattern was considered variable between exercises must include at least 2 separate exercises in which the exercise performed, exercise intensity, or duration or sequence of the exercise periods differed. Each individual algorithm reported and validated by a study was recorded as a separate data point in this review. In cases where values such as age and the RMSE were reported based on differing testing conditions but utilizing the same algorithm, a grand Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 6 of 16 mean of that value was calculated and reported with weighting based on the number of subjects in each condition. Only data from wearables and participants used in the validated algorithm were included. Data from participants or trials used to train or develop algorithms were excluded. The primary outcome measure collected from the selected studies was the root mean square error or deviation (RMSE or RMSD), a commonly used metric for measuring the goodness-of-ﬁt of a prediction algorithm. The RMSE can be interpreted as the standard deviation of the unexplained variance between the predicted and actual values. It is an absolute measure of ﬁt calculated using the square root of the variance of the residuals and is thus expressed in the same units (◦C) as the compared values. A lower RMSE value indicates a better ﬁt [ 55]. When reported, ± 1 standard deviation (SD) of the RMSE was also recorded. Where the RMSE was not reported by a study, the mean difference (MD) or standard error of the estimate (SEE) were collected as the outcome measures, along with their respective measures of variability. 3. Results 3.1. Article Search Results The systematic literature search identiﬁed 303 potential studies for analysis, 20 of which reported novel algorithms for CBT predictions using wearable sensors in exercising subjects that met all the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria. From those 20 study records, a total of 25 CBT prediction algorithms were identiﬁed, because 3 of the studies reported multiple algorithms. The root mean square error (RMSE) was reported as an outcome measure in 18 of the 25 algorithms, compared to the mean difference (MD) reported for 5 out of the 25 algorithms and standard error of the estimate (SEE) for 3 out of the 25 algorithms. The data used for validation of the algorithms were collected prospectively with the validation of the algorithm for 20 algorithms, while 6 of the algorithms were validated with retrospective data and one algorithm using both (Table 2). Table 2. Methodological and demographic details of the included studies. The clothing level was recorded as follows: light for short sleeve athletic wear, heavy for long sleeves and pants, and occupational for military or other specialized clothing. PC = Prospectively Collected and RC = Retrospectively Collected data. NR = Not Reported, V = Variable, O = Occupational Gear, H = Heavy (long sleeves and pants), and L = light (short sleeves and shorts). Model Year Validation Data Source Number of Validation Subjects, n Average Subject Age Average Subject Mass (kg) Subject Sex Subject Clothing Level Variable Exercise Conditions Variable Exercises CBT Comparator Moyen et al. [31] 2021 PC 27 28.9 75.2 M, F V Y Y GI Pill, Rectal Nazarian et al. [46] 2021 PC 15 NR NR M, F NR N N GI Pill Verdel et al. [57] 2021 PC 25 30 77.9 M NR Y Y Rectal Buller et al. [58] 2020 PC 21 21 80.5 M O N N GI Pill Tsadok et al. CF [47] 2020 PC 13 25 72 M O Y N Rectal Tsadok et al. CW [47] 2020 PC 13 25 72 M O Y N Rectal Tsadok et al. DF [47] 2020 PC 13 25 72 M O Y N Rectal Tsadok et al. DW [47] 2020 PC 13 25 72 M O Y N Rectal Hunt et al. [59] 2019 PC 8 26.4 77.4 M O Y Y GI Pill Eggenberger et al. MAX [60] 2018 PC 6 28.9 74.1 M V N Y Rectal Eggenberger et al. MIN [60] 2018 PC 6 28.9 74.1 M V N Y Rectal Laxminarayan et al. KF [56] 2018 RC 166 23.2 76.5 M, F V Y Y Rectal, Esophageal Laxminarayan et al. MM [56] 2018 RC 166 23.2 76.5 M, F V Y Y Rectal, Esophageal Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 7 of 16 Table 2. Cont. Model Year Validation Data Source Number of Validation Subjects, n Average Subject Age Average Subject Mass (kg) Subject Sex Subject Clothing Level Variable Exercise Conditions Variable Exercises CBT Comparator Welles et al. [29] 2018 PC 4 22 76.4 NR O Y Y GI Pill Mazgaoker et al.