Sensors 2022, 22, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 19 1. Introduction Exertional heat-related illness (HRI) is increasing in incidence as global temperatures rise, with at least 9000 student athletes and 2000 military members affected in the US each year [1–4]. The spectrum of illness of HRI ranges from heat-induced muscle cramps to lifethreatening heat stroke, and a rising core body temperature (CBT) during exercise directly leads to HRI and a subsequent decline in performance [5,6]. Early detection and intervention are critical to improving HRI outcomes, as mortality can drop from 80% in those with delayed cooling to 0% when elevated CBT is detected and reduced to less than 40 °C within 30 min of symptom onset [7–12]. Football players, soccer players, long -distance runners, military servicemembers, outdoor and manual workers, and eme rgency responders are all frequently affected by HRI -related morbidity and mortality (Figure 1) [2,13–19]. Despite the frequency and potentially fatal consequences of undetected HRI, coaches, trainers, officers, and employers currently rely on visible cues and subjective assessments of their athletes and employees for early detection, su ch as malaise, confusion, thirst, ataxia, or excessive sweating. This can tragically delay recognition and treatment [7,9,20]. Figure 1. Populations at a high risk for HRI and, thus, most important for the monitoring of CBT. This review focuses on the monitoring of CBT in athletes and other patients in dynamic environments such as first responders, oil rig and construction workers, and military, as sol utions already exist for inpatient and neonate monitoring. The monitoring of CBT can be instrumental in managing internal and external workloads to prevent the elevation of CBT to the critical temperatures at which HRI occurs and performance declines. A he althy resting CBT is considered to be 37 ° C ± 0.5 ° C or 98.7 ± 0.9 °F [21], and a slightly elevated CBT of around 38.5 °C/101.3 °F is a normal physiological response to exercise and generally not cause for concern [5,6,22]. Once CBT reaches 40 °C/104 °F, clinical diagnosis and treatment of HRI begins whether or not symptoms are present (Figure 2) [20]. CBT can rise as quickly as 1 ° C every 5 min at near-peak exercise intensities due to the heat generated from skeletal muscle contraction, increased metabolic rate, and increased heart rate (HR) [5,22]. Hot and humid climates worsen the rise in CBT and risk for HRI [11], especially if the patient is not acclimatized to exercising in a harsh environment [6]. Wearable technology is currently playing a role in actively monitoring the physiological status and preventing injury in athletes at all levels, and so, the integration of lowpower, high-fidelity predictive analytics with wearable sensors can enable the monitoring of CBT to ultimately provide the early detection and prevention of HRI [23–27]. Current Figure 1. Populations at a high risk for HRI and, thus, most important for the monitoring of CBT. This review focuses on the monitoring of CBT in athletes and other patients in dynamic environments such as ﬁrst responders, oil rig and construction workers, and military, as solutions already exist for inpatient and neonate monitoring. The monitoring of CBT can be instrumental in managing internal and external workloads to prevent the elevation of CBT to the critical temperatures at which HRI occurs and performance declines. A healthy resting CBT is considered to be 37 ◦C ± 0.5 ◦C or 98.7 ± 0.9 ◦F [21], and a slightly elevated CBT of around 38.5◦C/101.3 ◦F is a normal physiological response to exercise and generally not cause for concern [5,6,22]. Once CBT reaches 40 ◦C/104 ◦F, clinical diagnosis and treatment of HRI begins whether or not symptoms are present (Figure 2) [20]. CBT can rise as quickly as 1 ◦C every 5 min at near-peak exercise intensities due to the heat generated from skeletal muscle contraction, increased metabolic rate, and increased heart rate (HR) [5,22]. Hot and humid climates worsen the rise in CBT and risk for HRI [11], especially if the patient is not acclimatized to exercising in a harsh environment [6]. Wearable technology is currently playing a role in actively monitoring the physiological status and preventing injury in athletes at all levels, and so, the integration of low-power, high-ﬁdelity predictive analytics with wearable sensors can enable the monitoring of CBT to ultimately provide the early detection and prevention of HRI [ 23–27]. Current CBT measurement methods during exercise are limited to esophageal, rectal, or telemetric gasSensors 2022, 22, 7639 3 of 16 trointestinal pill thermometers, which are various combinations of invasive, obstructive to actively exercising athletes, slow to respond to changing CBT, and excessively costly for routine use [28,29]. Other CBT measurement methods used in clinical practice, such as oral, tympanic, axillary skin, and temporal skin, have shown to be unreliable in exercising subjects [30]. Due to these challenges, there has been a signiﬁcant effort to develop algorithms that provide accurate estimations of CBT by integrating key physiologic parameters such as heart rate, skin temperature, and skin heat ﬂux (Table 1) [29–34]. Figure 2. A schematic representation of the CBT at which heat-related illness occurs [5,6,20–22,35]. Includes how wearable CBT measurement systems can provide early intervention to reduce the need for the treatment and, ultimately, morbidity and mortality of HRI. EAMCs = exercise-associated muscle cramps. CBT has thus far proven challenging to predict via algorithms and noninvasive wearable sensors due to the inﬂuence of a myriad of personal, situational, and environmental variables on individual rates of heat accumulation and dissipation. Factors such as gender, age, medication usage, BMI, level of heat acclimatization, exercise workload, sport and position, clothing level, ambient temperature, and ambient humidity all have shown a correlation to an individual’s CBT [22,36]. The risk of HRI is increased in hot and humid environments due to inefﬁciencies in evaporative cooling mechanisms, but CBT can also reach critical levels in more temperate environments secondary to prolonged high-intensity activity or wearing heavy clothing and equipment that independently prevent effective evaporative cooling [6,11,17,22,28,37–41]. Due to this variability in both individual heat tolerance and the environments in which people experience heat stress, CBT prediction algorithms must be validated on a wide variety of subjects and conditions. Machine learning (ML) platforms applied to CBT prediction algorithms may provide the opportunity to increase the accuracy of CBT predictions, thereby potentially decreasing the risk of HRI. ML methods have quickly become widespread in medicine and sports science, with applications for reduction of the injury burden already in use in baseball, basketball, soccer, American football, and Australian football [51]. ML can locate and utilize patterns in the data that are difﬁcult or impossible for a human to identify, especially in large, multimodal data sets, and higher predictive power can be expected with increased data input [52]. Causal modeling or dimensionality reduction can be used to distinguish Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 4 of 16 related variables [53,54], which could simplify the process of algorithm development by easily identifying which sensors and at what locations are most correlated with CBT. Table 1. Comparison of methods used to measure CBT in exercising subjects. Summarized from reference [30]. Commercial devices listed are only those marketed or validated as measuring exercising CBT. Method Commercial Devices in Use for Exercising CBT Measurement Advantages Disadvantages Gastrointestinal • HQ, Inc. CorTemp [42] • Accurate measurement of internal CBT • Results are easily obtained even in athletic environment • Requires repeated ingestion • High cost and requires receiver device • Injured athletes who need an MRI and have ingested device cannot be imaged Rectal • Henry Schein DataTherm II [43] • YSI Temperature Sensor [43] • WelchAllyn SureTemp Plus [43] • Accurate measurement of internal CBT • Standard of Care • Cost-efﬁcient • Uncomfortable/painful • Not robust enough for athletic use Esophageal • Medtronic Mon-A-Therm [44] • Circa S-Cath Temperature Probe [45] • Accurate measurement of internal CBT • Highly sensitive to small changes in CBT—readings constantly changing • Uncomfortable/unreasonable in athletic settings Oral • None • Results are easily obtained • Standard of Care and readily available • Cost-efﬁcient • Not an accurate measurement of CBT • Not capable of continuous monitoring Temporal • None • Quick temperature readings • Capable of continuous monitoring • Inaccurate readings • Requires sensors placed on face • Could inhibit athletic protective equipment (e.g., helmets) Wearable Sensors (e.g., wrist monitors) • Nazarian et al. [46] • Tsadok et al. CW [47] • Tsadok et al. DW [47] • Built for athletic use without impeding athlete movement • Capable of continuous monitoring • Not as accurate as rectal monitoring • Efﬁcacy has yet to be validated during athletic activities Epidermal Sensors • Moyen et al. [31] • greenTEG CORE [48] • Equivital EQ02 [49] • Zephyr BioHarness [50] • Potential for extremely comfortable athletic use • Integration into textiles worn by athletes • Efﬁcacy has yet to be validated during athletic activities • Not as accurate as rectal monitoring The body of literature investigating CBT prediction systems is now growing, and algorithms are becoming more complex. Few of these scientiﬁcally evaluated algorithms using wearable devices are being used in practice to reduce the burden of HRI in at-risk populations. Yet, the number of wearable devices that report CBT measurements are increasing on the market. This systematic review provides a comprehensive understanding of how the prediction of CBT using wearable technology has been studied and the accuracy, reliability, and conditions in which CBT predictions have been validated in the literature (e.g., subject characteristics, exercise conditions, study methodology, and generalizability to larger populations). The results disseminating from this review will highlight how CBT is currently being calculated to better understand the gap in translational compatibility of this research into practical systems to prevent HRI and optimize performances in high-risk populations. 2. Materials and Methods A systematic literature search was conducted in the Web of Science Core Collection database to identify works from 1 January 2000 until 31 December 2021 in which predicted CBT was compared to measured CBT in exercising subjects. This database was selected for its inclusion in both medical and engineering journals. The search used the terms below, where TS stands for topic and searches the title, abstract, author keywords, and Web of Science Keywords Plus for the speciﬁed term or terms. TS = (core body temperature OR core temperature OR deep body temperature) AND TS = (noninvasive OR non-invasive OR wearable OR indirect) AND TS = (exercise* OR hot* OR heat* OR physical*) AND TS = (model* OR predict* or estimate*) Studies were excluded if they met any of the following criteria: 1. non-medical or non-human research; Sensors 2022, 22, 7639 5 of 16 2. systematic and narrative reviews or meta-analyses that did not develop a previously unreported CBT prediction algorithm; 3. did not include a wearable device (deﬁned below); 4. did not include exercising subjects; 5. validated the CBT prediction model with the same data on which it was developed; 6. did not use a sufﬁcient comparator method (ingestible telemetric temperature pills, rectal thermometer, or esophageal thermometer); 7. did not predict or measure CBT. The study selection process and enumeration of CBT prediction algorithms are depicted in Figure 3. Figure 3. Flowchart depicting the search results and methodology of the study selection. Additionally depicted is the enumeration of multiple prediction models from some studies. For this review, wearables were deﬁned as epidermal patches, wrist monitors, and chest straps [54]. Sufﬁcient comparators were deﬁned as ingestible telemetric temperature pills, rectal thermometers, or esophageal thermometers in accordance with the previous literature demonstrating the effectiveness of these methods in measuring the core body temperature [30]. The following data were extracted from papers meeting the inclusion andexclusion criteria: 1.